Mythras:  Games Mastery

oy X 2 o % o F WKW I+ & SO << A o B B T = < <G| 

Games 

Mastery
oy X 2 o % o F WKW MK K EX M T XN 

his chapter provides a range of notes for Games Masters — Adapt, change, improvise, import. These are all useful and valid 
I both those new to MYTHRAS and old hands. It offers tips and techniques for making your MYTHRAS. 

T techniques for running enjoyable games along with certain 
optional rules that Games Masters may wish to include in their cam- 
paigns. It is by no means exhaustive: Games Masters are continu- 
ally developing new ideas and techniques and many of these will be THhEe PEeTtEeRrSseEnN RUuLlEeSs 
unique to your own style of play. 

oOofF GooDd GAaMmIinNGg 
Sandy Petersen, celebrated game designer, has created five easy 

rules that are worthwhile for all Games Masters to bear in mind 

THh1is i1s YoOUuRr GAaMmEe when running a gaming session. 

The MYTHRAS rules are comprehensive and reasonably detailed. 1. Make Bonuses Worthwhile. If something is worth doing, it’s 

They work together through certain underlying concepts that are worth doing on a grand scale. Bonuses (and penalties) to 

replicated throughout the different areas of game mechanics: char- skills, whether offered through magic or in some other form, 

acter creation, combat, magic and so on. However there will always should mean something. This is why modifiers to skills (see 

be occasions where... the Skills chapter) are structured in the way they are. Mod- 
ifiers range from influencing a skill’s chance by increasing 

& A particular rule does not fit a certain, unique situation or it by half again (Easy skills) or reducing by a third, through 
even an overall playing style to being guaranteed success or making something simply 

& Games Masters and players devise something that works bet- impossible to accomplish. Higher magic, too, offers some 
ter for them quite substantial ways to influence skills and characteristics, 

& Rules found in a similar game system using similar mechanics whereas Folk Magic, simplest of all the magical systems, 
are desired over those found in MYTHRAS tends not to offer skill boosts or modifiers. 

Games Masters are encouraged to change, ignore and adopt 2. The Right lo Have Fun. MYTHRAS adventures should be fun 

rules to fit the style and needs of the campaign and players. MyTH- from the minute the players gather at the table. Try not 

RAS has always been extremely flexible in this regard, and this edi- to spend too long in dull preamble or book-keeping and 

tion of the game is no different. If something does not work how you start the session with a bang. Take cues from movies and 

think it should, change it. If you don’t like a particular rule, and feel television shows: good ones involve the characters (and the 

it’s superfluous, drop it. If you find a rule in a sister d100 game that viewer) immediately. Everyone should be involved and feel 

you really like, add it to your MYTHRAS game. The chances are that that they are involved. If things appear to be flagging, spice 

you will not break anything found in MYTHRAS — or can easily adapt them up quickly using humour, excitement, tension or some 

imported or house-created rules to work with the core mechanics. other device that hooks everyone back into the game. It is 

You should make MYTHRAS your game. The rules are a pre-pre- worthwhile having a few such hooks pre-prepared for just 

pared guideline but nothing should be considered as written in such an occasion. You might not need to use them, but if 

stone. There is no right or wrong way to play any roleplaying game, you do, you’ll be glad you made the effort. 

and you should adapt what you find in these pages to make your own 3. Show, Don’t Tell. Actions speak louder than words. If a non- 

game sing the song you want sung. player character is clearly a villain, have him act villainously. 
If a character is good, clean and wholesome, have them act 

278



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

that way. If a situation is foreboding and sinister, pepper a good idea for the Games Master to take a personal copy of ecach 
your description with signs (insects suddenly stop buzzing. A player’s sheet and hold it for both reference, and back-up. Every 
wolf howls. Thunder rumbles. The air grows suddenly cold. good Games Master knows the capabilities of his characters, and 
The characters break out in goose-bumps). You needn’t can use these to develop stories and scenarios that fit with what each 
worry about the players agreeing with your value percep- character can do, and their backstory. 
tions, even you feel they are based in reality: the main idea A supply of counters - coins, sweets, beads, buttons, bottle-tops, or 
is to convey an impression, an atmosphere, and a demon- poker chips — are a useful way of keeping track of variable attributes 
stration of what the characters experience. It all supports such as Action Points, Magic Points and Luck Points. Give each 
the Right to Have Fun. player a supply of different colours or types of counter according 

4. Three Strikes and You’re Out. If a player is making a decision to their character’s statistics and, when a point is spent on some- 
that could make life very difficult for himself and others, thing (performing a Combat Action, casting a spell) have the player 
try to give him at least three chances to make an informed put the appropriate counter into a discard pile. In this way players 
decision and possibly escape his fate. Luck Points will help can easily see what resources they have available, and do not need 
here, but there other techniques too. For example, a dragon to constantly amend their character sheet. The Games Master will 
might be threatening a small settlement; the first signal is need a supply too, for tracking the actions of foes and monsters. 
the villagers warning of the dragon’s lair. If this doesn’t Combat Reference Sheets and Tracker — we strongly recommend print- 
deter the characters, perhaps the dragon can be seen in the ing a copy of the Special Effects for each player at the table. To 
distance circling the mountain tops, casually incinerating begin with they will need to reference the different Special Effects 
the local undergrowth. If that still doesn’t deter the charac- so they can understand what each does and how it works. This will 
ters, then a direct encounter with the dragon — which is the encourage variety of Special Effect use, and saves wear and tear on 
third and final chance — might be looming. However things rulebooks. In time, as the players become more familiar with how 
turn out, the character has had ample opportunity to do Special Effects work, the sheets will be used less often, but making 
something about the situation. If things end badly, at least them available from the start, as part of a Character Pack, is a real 
the opportunities to avert disaster were presented. help for getting to grips with the game. You will also find a Combat 

5. 1t Always the Player’s Fault. By this we mean that, if things do Tracker sheet, used for recording Initiative order, wounds, and so 
go badly for a player, it should be a result of decisions made forth in the Reference section of MYTHRAS (or download from our 
and actions taken, rather than being a fault in the game website). This is designed to help with book-keeping during combat 
rules or their presentation by the Games Master. Players and is recommended for all Games Masters. 
ought not to feel cheated by the game system or bad dice Minatures, and Figures — Whilst MYTHRAS is not necessarily 
rolls. Players must feel that, if they had acted differently, designed specifically for miniatures play, there is no doubt that hav- 
they would have fared better and perhaps emerged victori- ing some form of character representation for combats and battles 
ous. Successful MYTHRAS sessions should not be Players ver- can help understand positioning, movement and engagement. There 
sus the Game System, or Players versus the Games Master. are hundreds of thousands of figures available, from those designed 
Responsibility for actions must be taken by the players, and for roleplaying games (typically 25-28mm) to those designed for war- 
so part of the Games Master’s job is to foster such oppor- games (15-25mm). You can even find very cheap cardboard figures 
tunities using the game system to assist and inform, rather that you can print, cut out, and then use ad infinitum. Choose fig- 
than oppose and penalise. ures that approximate the look and feel of the setting, but otherwise 

you are spoilt for choice. 
Battlemats and Movement Grids — used with figures, battlemats are 

usually pre-printed with either squares or hexagons, and used to reg- 

PRrEePpaARrAaTtIioOnN aAnNDd ulate positioning and movement. The scale represented depends on 
the size of the figures used. Typically, with 25-28mm figures a square 

GAaMmEe AIiDdSs or hex will represent about one metre, but you can, of course, adjust 

There are certain materials and game aids that you may find the scale to fit the figures. Some battlemats are covered in wipe-clean 

help manage each MYTHRAS session. They are not essential but finishes that let you use dry erase markers to sketch out rooms, walls, 

experience has found that they can make life easier. obstacles, and so on: a useful ad hoc mapping tool. 

Scrap Paper — for making notes and especially during character Wipeboard and Dry Erase Markers — a small wipeboard, about the 

creation. lor the latter, have players create their characters in rough dimensions of this book, can be easily bought from stationers along 

first, and when happy, transfer the information to a character sheet. with dry erase markers. These tools are incredibly useful for record- 

Pre-printed Character Sheets — you will find a sample MYTHRAS ing combat details, Initiative order, notes on wounds, or to do a 

character sheet on pages 302 to 303. You are free to copy this for quick, temporary sketch-map rather than rely on reams of scrap 

personal use (or download a copy from www.thedesignmechanism. paper. We recommend investing in a wipeboard and pens: its useful- 

com). It holds all the essential information needed by each player, ness at the gaming table is unparalleled. Plus, some wipeboards are 

and is structured to show the most useful play elements on the front magnetic too, and you can easily buy magnetic counters and sheets 

page, with additional detail on the rear. In time players will find that can then be customized to make Action Point trackers, initia- 

they outgrow their character sheets — or they become untidy, torn, tive trackers and so on, that attach easily to the wipeboard, further 

spoiled, and so on. From time to time refresh the character sheets extending its usefulness. 

but keep the old ones for reference in case they are needed. It is also 

279



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

Games Master Screen — not an essential, but definitely useful. scenarios. When getting together to create characters as a group, 
Screens should, on the Games Master’s side, have all the most rele- look to answer several questions: 
vant tables and rules summaries used during play. The players’ side 

& How do we all know each other? 
can carry artwork or reference materials such as Special Effects so 

& How do we feel about each other? 
that all the players can easily see them. A simple screen can be made 

& Does my character have a special relationship with any of the 
with a few sheets — 3 to 4 — of Letter or A4 card taped together. 

others (a brother, say)? If so, how? 
More expensive vinyl screens, with clear pockets for inserts, can be 

« Why do we want, or need, to work together? 
bought commercially, and these allow for infinite customisation of 

& Who else do we know? 
both Games Master and player information, simply by changing 

& How do we serve our communities? What do our communi- 
the insert. The reference sheets found in the Reference section of 

ties think of us? 
MyTHRAS are designed to work with such screens, or can be copied 

& Where do we want to go and what do we want to do? 
and glued onto a home-made cardboard screen. 

Books, References and Electronic Awds — only the Games Master really It is not necessary to address all of these questions immediately: 
needs the rulebook but a couple of additional copies are always use- answers often develop through time and play. But finding some 
ful in case players want to look something up. As an alternative, a answers at the character creation stage helps establish the group as 
PDF version of MYTHRAS can be easily chopped into appropriate a team and immediately starts to make things seem real. If all the 
pages or chunks (just print out what you need) that can then be used characters have some form of common background element, be it 
in place of the rulebooks, and obviously save on wear and tear. If culture, career, family, clan, cult or something else, they have a genu- 
you have PDF editing software you can compile your own Players’ ine reason for adventuring, and the Games Master does not need to 
Book if needs be. And, of course, PDF displays very well on tablet rely on clichés such as meeting in a crowded drinking establishment. 
devices that are becoming increasingly popular at the games table. 

WHhAaTt SKkiiLlLls ARrEe NEeEeDdEeDd? 
MyTHRAS’s skill system 1s incredibly flexible, allowing you to play 

CRrEeAaTtIinNgG CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs just about any character concept you can conceive. Every skill has a 

Character creation is best as a collaborative exercise — between use in the game. Sometimes though, it is useful to know which skills 

the player and Games Master, but also amongst the players, which are most likely to have a direct impact on play or be required in 

not only saves time but also offers other benefits. certain tense situations. This can help when assigning skill points at 

Group character creation greatly helps in cementing the group either cultural, career or free skill assignment stages. 

together, giving each character a reason for adventuring with the Athletics: Used in a variety of combat opposed rolls (resisting a 

others. Players can discuss and agree on differing and complemen- Bash, for example) 

tary character careers and backgrounds and, during the Culture Brawn: Good Brawn helps in removing impaled weapons — either 

and Community part of character creation, establish relationships one you have impaled, or one that’s been impaled in you. 

between their characters that go merely beyond ‘You all meet in a Combat Style: The higher your combat style, the better you fight. 

tavern...’: For example: Remember that a combat style covers several weapons, and has cer- 
tain traits that come into play in certain circumstances. As well as 

& All the characters could come from the same cultural back- being used to hit and defend against opponents, combat style is also 
ground, which makes logical sense. used in opposed rolls for damage and certain Special Effects. It can 

& Characters can be family members, either close or extended, also be used non-lethally. Why not use your Combat Style as a roll 
which creates bonds of blood and helps define beginning Pas- to intimidate opponents or as a way of identifying yourself to peers 
sions, loyalties and family structures. and contemporaries? 

& Characters can belong to the same, or affiliated, cults or Endurance: A decent Endurance score helps in resisting the effects 
brotherhoods, again providing a reason for adventuring. of Major and Serious Wounds. It is also used to resist certain tar- 

Tying the characters together during the character generation geted spells. 

stage lends the group communal Luck Points, as discussed on page FEvade: Essential for diving out of the way of missile weapons, 

81, representing their bonds and ties. charging monsters and certain targeted spells. It is also used for 

A group exercise can be invaluable in establishing a backstory actively closing range or disengaging from a melee: it is a very useful 

for the characters that the Games Master can then use in future skill. 
Insight: Used for determining motivation, emotional state, plans 

and plots... Insight is an extremely useful skill for reading other peo- 
ple. In combat, use Insight to perhaps determine what an observed 
opponent is likely to do if he generates a Special Effect, or if a seem- 
ingly idle opponent is preparing a spell. 

Passwons: In combat, passions can be used to augment a combat 
style or other skill. If fighting for the clan’s honour, Loyalty to Clan is 
a highly relevant augmentation to a Combat Style. The same is true 
for non-combat situations. Things a character feels strongly about 
constantly influence how certain other skills are used: Influence or 

280



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

Deceit, for example. Know your Passions and consider how they can Masai warriors do not encumber themselves with heavy 
be used in different situations. armour. Similarly, Greek hoplites, despite having very good 

Wallpower: Extremely useful for resisting certain spells, but also for access to bronze, left their limbs free or lightly armoured, to 
resisting Influence and Deceit attempts. Willpower is always a good maximize manoeuvrability, and optimise weight. In some 
skill to develop. cultures, armour may even be viewed as a weakness. 

Do not make the mistake of thinking that the above skills are the 3. Consider Game Impacts: heavy armour slows down the 
only ones that should be concentrated on for development: far from wearer in combat. Even though a character might be able 
it. MyTHRAS allows characters to develop both broad ranges of use- to afford a suit of full, articulated plate, it is cumbersome 
ful skills, and specialized skills for use in specific situations that reflect to wear, hot, and restricts as much as it protects. The edge 
professional training and personal growth. in combat is often won through speed rather than brute 

When it comes to investing skill points in skills during charac- protection. And, traditionally, plate armour is reserved for 
ter creation, and in choosing skills to benefit from Experience rolls, wars; not for daily use. Anyone wandering around a city 
think about your character’s concept and career. Focusing on only dressed as though for a battle will be incongruous and 
a handful of potentially useful skills will penalize the character in attract the wrong kinds of attention. Similarly, large, two- 
other areas that may not be immediately evident. handed weapons certainly deal a great amount of damage, 

In MyTHRAS, characters are not necessarily intended to be arche- but they limit certain options for defence. And, again, walk- 
types, but fully rounded individuals that have a wider range of tal- ing through town with a great axe is a sure way to attract 
ents than merely fighting, sneaking or casting spells. Social skills are trouble. In Rome, all personal weapons were banned in 
as every bit as useful as combat ones — especially if you need to talk the city: thus fantasy realms can, and should, have similar 
your way out of trouble. restrictions and taboos. 

Developing a decent range of skills across a wide spectrum of 4. Consider What’s Reasonable: MYTHRAS does not go over- 
areas improves your chances of succeeding in a multitude of situ- board on detailed rules for encumbrance but this does not 
ations. Within careers especially you have many options for devel- mean that common sense should be ignored. It is simply 
oping a character that is unique, and goes against traditional arche- impractical for a character to carry a kite shield, great axe, 
types and tropes. How about a warrior-poet? A duplicitous clan warhammer, longsword, crossbow, kit-pack and armour. 
adviser? A scrupulous, honest diplomat fighting against the corrupt Guide the players in these limits, and advise them what is 
system? Even a lowly fisherman or farmer can, in time of need, logical and practical. There is no need for extremely detailed 
become a hero of his people. rules regarding what can and cannot be carried — merely a 

MyTHRAS characters are what you make of them, and the rules degree of common sense and practical consideration. 
provide you with the tools to create some truly memorable and 
unique characters that defy conventional moulds and stereotypes 
(although you can build such characters if you want to). SocciiAaLl CLlAaSsSs 

Although the default position is to roll randomly for social class, 

EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt this should not be considered as being the sole method. There are 
several reasons for choosing or assigning social class instead: 

The Economics and Equipment chapter offers a reasonable 
selection of items for characters to buy when beginning the game. & Group integration is easier if all characters are from the same 
However there are a number of caveats for Games Masters when class. 
players start to make equipment selections— and these apply also to & Financial disparities between characters are avoided. 
defining Combat Styles too. 

1. Consider the milieu: what is the general nature of the period This second point is worth some expansion. It is true that those 

in which the campaign will be set? If in something roughly born into a wealthy or privileged background have access to more 

analogous to the classical period (Ancient Greece, Rome, and better equipment, supporting resources and ready cash: but 

Mesopotamia, and so on) equipment, armour and weapon such has it always been. That said, the income levels described in 

choices should reflect that milieu. Just because MYTHRAS the Economics and Equipment chapter relate to the costs of main- 

lists a piece of equipment does not mean it should be avail- taining an accustomed standard of living. Those born into a wealthy 

able. Use your judgement and the milicu of the setting to class will need to spend a far greater proportion of anything they 

guide reasonable choices. earn to maintain that standard of living than, say, Freemen. And, 

2. Consider the cultural background: would barbarians really having monetary wealth available does not always guarantee that 

have access to crossbows and heavy plate armour? Would a its owner has any natural right to it. Wealthier social classes are not 

nomad, used to riding and fighting from horseback, encum- always debt-free — a bag of coins a nobleman has to hand may have 

ber himself or his mount with a polearm? Would a city- been obtained from a moneylender with property used as collateral. 

dweller be trained in using a sling when the militia uses What would happen if the debt was suddenly called in? 

spears and bows? Weapon, armour and equipment choices There is, though, always a certain perception of inequality asso- 

should reflect cultural heritage as much as the milieu. ciated with disparate levels of character wealth. For this reason, 

Consider the environment too. Metal armour is generally and especially if starting wealth is seen as necessary to a campaign, 

impractical in very hot and humid climates and is also Games Masters should assign the same social class to all charac- 

difficult to manufacture, or expensive to obtain, if a soci- ters to maintain parity or limit wealthier classes from beginning 

ety lacks the raw materials needed. There is a reason why the game with what might be perceived as an unfair advantage. In 

281



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

reality, society has always suffered such inequalities, and it should moment, be fruitless and quickly divert their attention with a press- 
be remembered that simply being able to afford lots of equipment, ing scenario elsewhere. 
arms and armour does not equate with being able to use any of it Of course the availability of personal Luck Points makes the risk 
effectively. of failing crucial investigation rolls less likely, providing the Games 

On the other hand, one advantage of having someone move in Master encourages the use of them in non-combat situations. 
advantageous social circles is access and influence in high places. A way around this is through the use of those Luck Points pro- 
There may be times when having a noble class in the party can assist vided through forming Personal Connections, as described in the 
in ways far more subtle than in simple monetary terms. The rich Culture and Community chapter. This group pool of Luck Points 
tend to move in circles of power and influence; this means that a could be used by characters when involved in an investigative situa- 
character from a wealthy or noble social class can, when it is needed, tion where it is essential to gather clues and information to progress. 
draw on family and personal contacts that would otherwise be Instead of making skill rolls, such as Perception, Insight, Lore or 
denied to characters of a more lowly station. This is important in all something else, the characters can opt to spend a group Luck Point 
cultures, not just the civilised ones. to receive a vital piece of information in lieu of a skill roll. 

Sitting at the chieftain’s table places one closer to her ear or the Spending points in this way depletes the pool which will not 
ear of his advisers. High ranking nomads ride closer to the khan’s refresh until the next game session, but it does guarantee that char- 
caravan; highly placed primitive peoples may have influence with acters can, through judicious use and communal efforts, avoid the 
the tribal elders or high shaman. Rank brings influence, and influ- frustrations of bad dice rolls when searching for something they 
ence can be far more precious than money. Having disparate social need. A Games Master could even restrict the use of the group’s 
strata within an adventuring group should be viewed pragmatically Luck Points to non-combat situations only, which would further 
rather than with jealousy. Money isn’t everything, and influence in encourage their use for investigation. 
the right places can assist when money’s voice has fallen silent. Using Luck Points to automatically discover clues is a purely 

optional feature and always at the Games Master’s discretion — but 
they do provide a straightforward mechanism for conducting inves- 
tigation and research without complete reliance on the vagaries of 

InNvVEeSstTiIgGaAtTiIoOnNSs the dice; providing of course, that the investigation is not so complex 
Some scenarios rely more on research, mystery, intrigue, and that it burns through every available Luck Point. 

detective work than on the use of the weapons. The gathering of 
clues to solve a puzzle or mystery i3 an essential element of such 
adventures but one problem frequently encountered is the missing 
of vital clues through failed skill rolls. Of course, Games Masters UssSiInNgG PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 
are quite at liberty to make clues obvious or even hand them out Although Passions are offered as an optional rule in MYTHRAS, 
through roleplaying to ensure the smooth flow of the investigation, Games Masters are recommended to consider using them as an 
but this can take away some of the drama and excitement of uncov- active part of their games. 
ering a clue or piece of information through the skill rolls of an Throughout all kinds of fiction, and especially in fantasy, pas- 
investigative process. sion drives the plot. The desire to save the world from the evil dark 

The most vital aspect of well designed scenarios is that they have lord; to pursue and gain power; to quest for glory and lost wisdom; 
alternate means of reaching their conclusion. A scenario, especially to defend, find or avenge love. The variations are limitless and the 
one centred upon investigation, should never come to a juddering Passions system is capable of handling them all. 
halt if a crucial clue is not discovered. Even if a particular skill check Every individual is driven by some sort of passion. Passions both 
is pivotal to the plot, a good Games Master should ensure that what- inform and cloud choices. The heart governs the head, and rational 
ever the outcome, it pushes the storyline forwards. For example a thinking is replaced by that overwhelming compulsion a true passion 
failed investigative roll could result in: brings. There is nothing we will not do to save our loved ones. Our 

loyalty to leader or country drives us to selfless acts. Passions impel 
& False information which leads characters to jump to the 

us, and in MYTHRAS the Passions mechanics can help drive an entire 
wrong conclusion 

campaign. 
& Finding only part of the information which will lead them off 

Games Masters can use passions in a variety of ways, designing 
on a roundabout side plot 

entire scenarios around the feelings that a character holds for a par- 
& An intuitive itching that they are missing something, which 

ticular subject or antagonist. These can be very fulfilling for players, 
resolves itself in a dream or flash of inspiration soon after 

especially when they begin to vicariously experience the emotions 
& The interruption of the investigation attempt, preventing the 

gripping their characters. 
characters from locating the clue till they return at a later time 

The course of a campaign can hinge on a single passion. Con- 
& Arrival of a scroll or informant soon after, to get the charac- 

sider the Greek sagas and Shakespeare’s tragedies. In The Iliad, 
ters back on line, but at the expense of worsening the situation 

Troy is besieged because the love between Paris and Helen causes 

The secret is to never stonewall the characters, but always keep them to act in a specific way, forcing Agamemnon to seek bloody 

the story flowing. In some situations, such as a sandbox style cam- revenge. In Macbeth, Lady Macbeth’s ambition drives her weaker 

paign, reaching an impasse on one plotline does not prevent charac- husband to commit regicide, plunging the kingdom into tyranny, 

ters from continuing others in the meantime; but the Games Master paranoia, further bloodshed and, eventually, war. 

should make it clear that pursuing their investigation will, for the Passions, then, can play a crucial part in a campaign at a per- 
sonal level, or be at its heart and drive it, at a much higher level. 

282



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 
Qver the course of her adventuring career; Anathaym has developed the 

When preparing for character creation, Games Masters should 
‘Hate Badoshi Warlords® passion. The Badoshi have continually threatened give some consideration to Combat Styles. To summarise what a 
her homeland but now she has been chosen to lead a delegation sent to negotiate 

style is: 
a crucial truce with these merciless barbarians. 

At the Badoshi fortress she s continually insulled, belittled, and chal- & The way a character has been trained to fight 
lenged — a typical Badosh: ruse that she ought to resist. The Games Master & The weapons with which that character has been trained, 
calls for Anathaym to roll against ‘Hate Badosh’ to see if;, finally, she can usually dictated by culture and career. 
resist the constant snide attempls to demean her positon. If her rollfals then 

MyTHRAS does not prescribe any limits on the number of weap- 
she can control her overwhelming feelings to extract vengeance; if it succeeds, 

ons a Combat Style can contain or cover. The primary reason for 
her hatred will overcome her, whach is what the Badoshi want. 

this is because such limits are always arbitrary, whereas a particular 
Her roll does, indeed, succeed, and she challenges the Badoshi champion to 

setting may have quite extensive training regimes. lor instance, a 
single combat, and kills kim. The Badoste Warlords expel the delegation afier 

Barbarian Hunter style may include weapons such as spear, sling, 
slaughtering half of them. Anathaym barely escapes with her own life. Way; 

bow, net and bolas whereas a Barbarian Warrior style may only 
not peace, s assured. The delegation has failed as a result of Anathaym’s 

include sword and shield. Of course, Games Masters can ensure 
hatred. The campaign will now follow a very different course due to the use 

that all Combat Styles in their campaign are balanced in the number 
of this Passwn. 

of weapons contained, but this is something that the Games Master 
Anathaym’s inabilaty to allow her head to rule her heart results in a poten- 

should establish as part of campaign preparation. 
tially disastrous outcome. It involved a straight roll against her Passion. How- 

There are, however, some recommendations we offer when 
even; consider thefollowing alternative. . . 

developing Combat Styles: 
Instead of a straight roll versus ‘Hate Badoshi Warlords® the Games 

Master rules that Anathaym should make an opposed roll of her hatred & Always consider the culture developing the style. Different 
against her Loyalty to Meeros’. Her Loyalty roll wins the contest. Although societies during different eras follow many diverse trends and 
Anathaym is filled with loathing for the treatment meted out to the delega- fashions. For example, with the introduction of gunpowder 
tion, her Loyalty prevails, and she weathers the insulls. The Badoshi are weapons shields began to fall out of favour, leading to a range 
secretly impressed by Anathaym’s conduct, and the peace negotiations continue of very different fighting styles that eschewed the shield as a 
although so do the insults. However, war is averted, and Anathaym returns protective instrument. Whereas in feudal Japan shields were 
lo her queen as a heroine: her head has ruled her heart, and many lives will 
be saved as a resull. 

Passions complicate choices, pose moral dilemmas and spur charac- 
ters to acts of great heroism or flawed villainy. Naturally the Games 
Master must exercise a certain caution if using Passions to drive core 
behaviours, but, if used wisely and subtly, Passions can transform a 
campaign from a series of set pieces into a truly epic saga of hero- 
ism, treachery, victory and defeat. 

Note that some players can find the use of passions in this man- 
ner an imposition, regarding it as a loss of personal control over their 
character; whilst others welcome the concept of using dice rolls to 
escape the responsibility of making a difficult choice, or simply enjoy 
the random vagaries of fate produced by rolling for such things. As 
such Games Masters should carefully consider whether passions suit 
their players, before introducing them in play. 

COoMmBbAaTt 
MyTHRAS combat can be deadly. A combination of good com- 

bat skills, Special Effects and weaponry can fell even the toughest 
opponent quickly. Here are some words of advice regarding combat 
generally and more specific situations. 

283



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

always very uncommon, even in the periods when archery ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
was considered the pre-eminent style of combat. Meeros_finally falls to the army of monstrous beasts, let into the city by 

& Try to ensure that Combat Styles do not include overlapping treachery. The populacef lees to the fortified acropolis upon which the queen’s 
weapons. If this is impossible, then a character should use the palace, and most important temples stand, but the gates fail to shut due to 
style most fitting to the current circumstances. For example some_foul sorcery which has welded their hinges solid. Facing total slaughter, 
a Barbarian Warrior trained in Sword, Spear and Bow may Anathaym stands in the gateway at the head of the remaining Scarlet Spears, 
also be trained in the Shield Wall Combat Style which focuses and invokes every magic at her command, determined to cut down as many 
on Sword, Spear and Shield. If the warrior finds himself in a monsters as she can before her soul travels to Myceras. 
shield wall situation then the Shield Wall Combat Style per- Up the ramp approaches a mass of centaurs, satyrs, and Panthotaurs, 
centage would be used for measuring his Sword and Spear led by their leader;, a massive minotaur bedecked in armowr, and wielding a 
capability — because the shield wall imposes a very different great axe. Io hus side stands the traitor Xenos, who grinsf iercely as he sees his 
fighting style. Similarly fighting from horseback requires hatedf oe preparing herself for her death. The minotaur king, and Anathaym 
very different weapon techniques to foot combat: a Cavalry recognuse one another’s status, and gesture to their fellows that this will be a 
combat style might contain Sword, overlapping with another single combat between heroes. 
style, and this would be used whenever a character engages in Both protagonists exchange many mighty blows back, andf orth before the 
combat when mounted. manotaur king suffers outrageous masfortune, hus gold painted hoof slipping on 

& Styles can include melee and ranged weapons. A thief, for a pebble, causing ham to drop his axe, andf all prone beneath the ready, glowing 
instance, trained in the Shadow Walkers style (dagger, shorts- tip of Anathaym’s spear. Instead of plunging home her weapon into the near 
word and garrotte, for instance), can reasonably be assumed helpless minotaws; she honourably salutes herformidable opponent, and takes 
to be able to throw his dagger as well as use it in hand to several steps backwards to allow ham to rise. The bull king recognises this act 
hand combat. Again though, culture and practice will deter- of merey, recovers his huge axe, and bellows that in exchangef or his life he will 
mine if; and when, a weapon can also be used in ranged cir- allow Meeros to stand, then orders his army to depart. 
cumstances. Some styles will almost certainly focus only on T he wrathful Xenos protests ths act, demanding the minotaur hack down 
ranged weaponry whilst others will focus completely on hand the presumptuous bitch, which the minotaur king blithely ignores. Finally, 
to hand combat. consumed by hatred, the pampered noble draws his own sword, and rushes 

& Discuss the different options with the players during character Jeroctously at Anathaym, screaming angrily with each strike. .. 
creation, and establish requirements according to each play- 
er’s character concept, culture and profession. Allow for flex- 
ibility and creativity, and point out weapon specific Special DeeAaTthH Is NoTt ThHEe 
Effects appropriate to their nature: this will help encourage 
creative use of Special Effects during combat scenes, leading ONnLlYy OPpTtIioOnN 
to more interesting fights. Victory need not, and should not, be dependent on killing every 

single opponent. An intelligent foe, beaten and helpless, is far more 
likely to surrender or call for mercy than fight to the absolute and 

You KNnooww,, THhiis IsnN'’tT bitter end. Captured opponents can be ransomed, questioned or 
even released in an honourable way, leading to perhaps a future alli- 

NEeCcEeSSssAaRYr.y.…. ance or a similar acts of mercy if the characters find themselves on 
It should be obvious when superior numbers, displays of skill, the losing side. Injured opponents may simply try to flee. Just about 

good arms and armour will make a fight very one sided. Characters every creature, sapient or not, seeks to avoid death and injury. 
should always, before secking to initiate combat, ask themselves if it MyTHRAS provides many tools for bringing a fight to a victori- 
is worthwhile; necessary; inevitable, or most important of all, if it is ous conclusion without wholesale slaughter. Characters should be 
survivable! encouraged to think about those options that can win a fight con- 

Fighting should always be a last resort with alternative means clusively without necessarily drenching themselves in blood to do so. 
— negotiation, trickery, or even retreating — being taken into consid- Special Effects such as Trip, Disarm, Press Advantage and Compel 
eration beforechand. Indeed, this can even form a phase of a poten- Surrender can all bring a fight to a satisfactory conclusion without 
tial combat, handled in Combat Rounds, but using social skills to death being a forgone conclusion. 
adjudicate a potential outcome. For example, Insight can be used 
to judge whether an opponent has the stomach for a fight, despite 

KiiLllLinngG HAass COoNnSsEeQqUuEeNnCcEeSs 
obvious bravado. Influence and Passions could be used to negotiate 

Whilst combat has always had pride of place in many roleplaying 
a peaceful outcome before weapons are drawn. 

games, especially MYTHRAS, it should be remembered that mindless 
Honourable and reasonable opponents will seek alternatives to 

violence and death are frowned upon by most cultures, for the basic 
fighting and not lose face in doing so. Creatures, if outnumbered or 

reason that it undermines society. Whilst killing is permitted in cer- 
cornered, will flee rather than risk life and limb. Consider what can 

tain circumstances, in times of war or in self defence perhaps, there 
be done to reduce the risk of injury and death before rushing in to 

are usually conventions to observe. For instance not even on the bat- 
deal damage. An opponent may have unknown magical reserves or 

tlefield is it always expected or even permitted to kill surrendered or 
skills that make even what seems like the most obviously one-sided 

helpless foes. 
fight something different entirely. 

Characters should scale any violent reaction proportionately to 
the event which triggered it, suited to the culture they are in. For 

284



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

example, a thief who attempts to rob characters in a back alley at outclassed by their opponents. Such encounters should pose a con- 
knifepoint rarely deserves to be slaughtered, since folks would con- siderable chance that they will be badly injured. 
sider frightening off the criminal, or at most giving him a beating, a Games Masters need to be aware of these limitations in MYTH- 
more than sufficient retort. Of course, if that thief was also a mur- Ras and structure their games accordingly. If combat becomes the 
derer who killed his victims then a more violent response would be focus of the campaign, occurring so frequently that there is little 
in order. time to heal naturally or recover magical resources between encoun- 

As a rule opponents in a fight are rarely willing to continue to ters, the characters will either be unable to complete their quests or 
the death unless driven by some overwhelming passion — be that be slain from the accumulation of crippling injuries. 
religious fanaticism, protection of a loved one, or seeking to sate Players, in particular, need to understand that when bloodied 
a need for vengeance. Generally, rather than death, foes will seek and bruised from one violent encounter, another in quick succession 
quarter, beg for mercy or attempt to flee. Killing at this point can is not the best way of making progress: hiding, fleeing or talking 
bring serious repercussions. their way out of trouble may prove to be far more beneficial. 

Of course mishaps occur when weapons are being swung, but 
unnecessary butchery soon brings a double-edged reputation. On 

AccTtionN PoiiNnTts ARrEe NOoTt 
one hand the characters will become known as men not to be trifled 
with, but conversely they will alienate themselves from those they ThHEe BEe ALlLl AanNDd EnNdD ALlLl 
ostensibly protect. Action Points certainly bestow advantage. Being able to do more 

Repetitive killing can draw unwelcome attention from local rul- in a combat round can make all the difference. However, characters 
ers whom rarely appreciate those who take matters of law or pun- that may feel penalized by only having 2 Action Points, rather than 
ishment into their own hands. Killing the wrong person can bring 3, (or 3 Action Point characters facing an creature with 4) still have 
retribution from a powerful patron or perhaps start a vendetta with many options available to help level the odds: 
a slain victim’s family; cult or brotherhood. A society usually has Speed Helps: Striking first, through a higher Initiative, offers a 
strict rules about death, even as part of an honourable duel or self significant advantage. Lightly armoured characters can exploit this 
defence. It may be something as simple as paying wergild to com- opportunity when facing slower, heavily armoured ones. 
pensate the family of the slain or might result in exile to avoid ongo- Numbers Matter: Outnumbering a foe can quickly resolve a fight 
ing disruption within the clan or settlement. because the foe cannot hope to use its own Action Points to effec- 

Games Masters are encouraged to consider what happens in our tively deal with two opponents who have 2 Action Points each. Con- 
own world to those who practice gratuitous violence upon members versely creatures that attack in packs use their weight of numbers 
of their own society. On the other hand it can be completely differ- to overwhelm their opponents, so numerical advantage should be 
ent to pursue the same degree of slaughter against an enemy culture, exploited when possible. 
race or species. Manoeuvring: A character who is outnumbered can make excellent 

use of the Outmanoeuvre Combat Action to keep multiple foes at 

PAaCcciInNgG COoMmBbAaTt ENnCcOoUuNnTtEeRrSs bay, buying time for help to come or simply remaining unengaged 

Unlike some roleplaying games, healing magic is not ubiquitous, (and possibly fleeing). 

meaning that injured characters are not going to be able to fall back Use of Weapons: Long weapons, such as spears, can hold an oppo- 

on a plethora of spells, potions and scrolls to regain lost hit points if nent at a safe distance limiting what can be done even with a supe- 

they lurch from one combat to another. Natural healing can be slow rior number of Action Points. And long weapons can be used to 

and if the characters are in an isolated location, far away from places injure— and whittle down — an opponent without him getting close 

offering rest and sanctuary, healing will take longer, and characters enough to attack. A long weapon impaled in a human-sized creature 

be placed at greater risk. will severely hamper its skills and movement, leading to a massive 

It is therefore imperative for Games Masters to carefully pace disadvantage regardless of its Action Points. Remember: a weapon 

violent encounters: too many and characters will soon die. Similarly, is a tool, and tools have multiple uses beyond the obvious. 

players will need to pace their activities according to any lingering Use of Special Effects: A common misconception is that special 

wounds or injuries. If every character in a party is injured and there effects such as Choose Location and Maximise Damage are the 

is no easy access to healing, magical or natural, a fight will be the last most advantageous. They are definitely effective, but when faced 

thing they need (unless they are all truly suicidal). with an opponent that has more Action Points those special effects 

Of course not all scenarios need not involve combat at all, instead that deny Action Points, or force them to be used for activities other 

relying on social interaction, good roleplaying and use of wits to suc- than attack or defence, are often better choices. An overextended 

ceed. However, those adventurers that do involve physical conflict foe cannot attack on his next turn. A disarmed foe has to spend an 

should limit themselves to several minor encounters, and one major. Action Point to draw another weapon. Bash can force an opponent 

Minor engagements are those where characters have signifi- out of engagement, making him expend an Action Point simply to 

cantly greater skills and perhaps armour than their opponents. Rab- regain it. 

ble and Underlings (see page 111) are often good fodder for these Never Ignore Defence: Another misconception is that, if an attack 

sorts of encounters, as are lone creatures whom the characters can against you fails, it makes little sense to spend an Action Point in 

gang up on. defending — it could be more useful for an attack. However, a suc- 

Major engagements should be used as the climax of a scenario, cessful defence roll against an unsuccessful attack generates a Special 

being battles where the characters are evenly matched or slightly Effect, and any opportunity to gain an advantage (especially if you 
have fewer Action Points) should not be ignored. All the defensive 

285



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

Special Effects have their uses, and some can easily dictate the out- of skills, here are some suggestions for also introducing challenges 
come of a fight. A Blind opponent suffers a significant disadvan- that are not so one-sided as to diminish players’ enjoyment. 
tage for 1d3 turns; Opening Range can afford the defender valuable Superior, but not overwhelming, numbers can help: take the par- 
breathing space. Try not to overlook the use of defensive opportu- ty’s size, and increase the number of opponents by two individuals. 
nities even when straight logic might dictate reserving Action Points Use packs of creatures, using pack tactics. Pack hunters, such as 
for an attack. wolves, rarely stalk alone. Size a pack as above, but have the pack 

Shields are Invaluable: 'Two handed weapons definitely do more work differently to sapient opponents: surrounding, harrying, wear- 
damage and wielding a pair of swords looks impressive, but there ing down, and then sending multiple numbers against the most help- 
is no substitute for a shield when it comes to pure defensive expedi- less seeming member. The party will be forced into measures that 
ence. Shields block the damage of large weapons and creatures very consolidate their numbers for safety and aim to drive the pack away. 
effectively, and are the only way to defend against ranged attacks. Exotic arms and armour. Have that raiding group of goblins attack 
But don’t underestimate their usefulness in other areas: Passive with nets and tridents rather than swords and shields, giving the 
Blocking keeps multiple locations defended, and a shield, when used opponents different Special Effect options that might be unfamiliar 
to Bash, is more effective than other blunt-force weapons. to the characters, such as Entangle. 

The best approach is a combination of all the above techniques Make use of ambushes and ranged attacks: ranged attacks can be diffi- 
in different circumstances. For one thing, combat becomes more cult to counter, and doubly so if the enemy has taken advantage of 
interesting and can yield some interesting results. Good and clever excellent cover. The characters will be forced to find ways of closing 
use of techniques and tools can truly level the battlefield when it whilst defending themselves, or be forced to use their own ranged 
comes to Action Point disparity, and the MYTHRAS combat system attacks, to counter even a modestly-skilled opponent. If characters 
has been carefully designed to take into account the myriad combat are surprised by an ambush, they will be forced to spend a round 
options available and the fact that opponents are not always evenly defending before they can counter attack, again making modestly 
matched. skilled opponents a hazard and challenge in the earliest stages of a 

fight. 
Consider use of magic. Sapient creatures are just as capable of using 

GRrAaDdIinNGg OPpPpOoNnEeNnTtSs 
magic as the characters. Equipping a set of foes with spells such 

“How should I grade opponents so that fights are balanced?” 
as Bladesharp and Demoralise can compensate for perceived lack 

This is a frequently asked question, especially by Games Masters 
of skill and force different tactics. A shaman, controlling several 

coming to MYTHRAS from roleplaying games that have structures in 
fetishes, can prove to be a match for any player-character spell caster 

place, such as experience and challenge levels, designed to maintain 
or well-armed fighters. Remember that sapient creatures have access 

party/opponent parity. 
to similar resources as characters: use them wisely, and this will help 

The easiest way is to match opponent and character numbers, 
grade the challenges characters face. 

with the opponent’s skills in roughly the same range (+/- 10%) as 
Have creatures fight according to their nature. 'The Creatures chapter 

the characters’ skills. However, this can lead to boring and repetitive 
gives more detail about how creatures tend to involve themselves 

combats — especially if neither the characters nor their opponents 
in combat: read and use these guidelines which will help in making 

use Special Effects to their full advantage. Combats are usually at 
fights with non-sapient creatures far more interesting and challeng- 

their best when opponents are challenging and not necessarily bal- 
ing for the characters. 

anced. So, in addition to giving opponents a certain parity in terms 
Use of local conditions and the environment. Adventurers are usually 

the strangers in a locale. This lends the incumbent species or oppo- 
nents a distinct advantage in using terrain, staging surprise attacks, 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA driving the characters into bottlenecks, and so forth. Many species 
The battle between Xenos, and Anathaym is epu, fuelled by years of are nocturnal or have excellent night-sight, making their attacks for 

building hatred. At furst the warrioress, despite her injuries, has the advan- more likely to occur during the hours of darkness, when characters 
lage; but Xenos uses his Hate Anathaym passion to boost hus Combat Style, should suffer from penalties due to the absence of light. Couple this 
granting him the greater skill, forcing her on the defence. Several blows later, with unfamiliar terrain, and even a simple fight may become very 
strengthened by lus brutal, unrestrained rage he culs through her spear shaft, challenging. 
and Anathaym is_forced to draw her shortsword. Never forget fatigue. Sustained effort equals fatigue. If characters 

Gloatingly Xenos describes what he’ll do to her sister once he has dealt have been travelling through difficult country with heavy loads, then 
with Anathaym, and the conceited queen who refused his marriage proposal. they may well be suffering from fatigue. Clever predators will keep 
T has incenses Anathaym so greatly that she uses her own Hate Xenos passion watch for many hours to ensure a potential opponent is worn down 
to augment her combat prowess. Then with consummate skill, she cuts off hus whilst it is still fresh and able. Use the fatigue rules to simulate the 
sword hand at the wrist. Xenos screams in agony, and drops to lus knees in toll on both characters and opponents. In this way, monsters that 
Jront of thefurous warrion. are seemingly very, very tough can be pitched against fresh-as-daisy 

Thas time there is no mercy in her heart. Heedless of the strident com- characters if the monster is tired or tiring. 
mands gwen her by the queen, and before anyone can interfere, she decapitates Ultimately ‘balanced’ encounters are less about relative combat 
Xenos — claiming the vengeance she has long sought. She has litle time to skills, hit points, armour and weapons, and more about tactics and 
savour her victory. All too soon she is disarmed by her Scarlet Spear compa- 
triots, and escorted to_face judgement by the senate for killing the one man she 
was_forbidden from harming 

286



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

use of the environment. Games Masters should never forget two help determine the outcome. Indeed, such mechanics can greatly 
things when developing encounter challenges for characters: speed up play and keep the action flowing. 

The task system, described on page 65, used for crafting and 
& Characters have Luck Points — these can be life-savers. 

manufacturing goods, can be tailored to help resolve social conflict 
& Characters are on the path to be being heroes— and should 

situations. The system is straight-forward: 
have the opportunity to act in this way. Stupidity and lack of 
planning should not be rewarded. « Instead of a Craft or similar roll, characters use their social 

skills: Commerce, Customs, Deceit, Insight, Influence, Ora- 
In MyTHRAS even relatively low-skilled opponents can still fell a 

tory, Passions and Willpower, as appropriate. 
mighty warrior with a 120% Combat Style if they are cunning and 

& The Games Master frames the social conflict setting: ‘Per- 
selective in their tactics. Likewise a character with a mere 40% in 

suade the senate to go to war’ for instance; ‘Defend your per- 
bow and arrow can still attempt to bring down the fire-breathing 

sonal honour’; ‘Cut a braggart down to size using cunning 
dragon. Experience with the combat mechanics will help shape chal- 

wit.” Next he decides how long achieving the objective is likely 
lenging encounters that include seemingly unbalanced opponents. 

to take. This could be a few seconds of verbal sparring; a few 
minutes of impassioned rhetoric; or many hours of detailed 

NOoNn--PPLlAaYyEeRr CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr and tense negotiations. 
& The aim of the characters (or the opponent) is to score 100% 

STtAaTtIiSsTtIicC BLloOCcKkSs or more over the course of the conflict. Each participant may 
Although the Creatures chapter provides the same range of 

characteristics and attributes as for adventurers, Games Masters 
only rarely need this level of detail. And, in most circumstances, an ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
average of a species is perfectly fine without the need to roll a com- Anathaym faces her queen’s wrath for killing Xenos. The ruler had 
pletely bespoke example. expressly wanted the traitor alive, not only to gather information concerning 

When running an encounter likely to result in combat, the fol- how the city fell so quickly, but also to weaken the political power of certain 
lowing information is most crucial: members of the Senate. Worse still, Musogynistes, the father of Xenos, has 

charged Anathaym with breaking the ancient law forbidding the slaying of 
& Action Points, Initiative Bonus, Armour Point, Hit Points, 

a member of the sacrosanct_founding families. With her grip on the throne 
Movement Rate, Magic Points 

weakened by the devastating sack on Meeros, the queen has hitle option but to 
& Combat Style (with weapon values), Athletics, Brawn, Endur- 

let the trial continue. 
ance, Evade, Perception, Stealth and Willpower. 

The Games Master decides the trial takes place over the course of several 
& Important Traits. Unless a creature has a particular skill 

days, with each roll representing one day of game-time. As a guilty member 
useful in combat or other encounter situations, then a more 

of the conspiracy Maisogynustes uses his Deceit skill o musrepresent evidence 
detailed skill list is superfluous. If a skill is unlisted and Games 

against the warrioress, twisting well known tales of her years actwely perse- 
Masters need to assign a value in a hurry, give the opponent 

cuting lis son. To counter his honey-tonguedf abrications, Anathaym uses her 
or creature either 30%, 60% or 90% depending on whether 

Influence skill in an attempt to show that she has always faithfully served 
it can be expected to be poor, competent or good at the 

the ciy. 
required skill. For example, a group of characters encounter 

Day One: Anathaym’s Influence roll is a success, whilst Maisogynistes’ 
a troupe of centaurs and end up negotiating with them rather 

(stall overwhelmed by his son’s loss) fails. She scores 25% towards her goal 
than fighting; the Games Master has not listed Influence in 

of 100. 
the required statistics, but it can be assumed that at least one 

Day Two: This time Misogynistes scores a critical success whilst Ana- 
of the centaurs has Influence 60%, representing a reasonable 

thaym only succeeds. Both parties now have a score of 50%, and the trial is 
level of negotiation skill. 

neck, and neck, fuelling much impassioned debate in the taverns that evening. 
Day Three: Only Anathaym succeeds, as Misogymstes fauls to arrive at 

the senate house that day (automatic failure). Her stoic defence against the 
senate’s questions allows her to draw ahead with 75%. 

SocciiaALl COoNnFfLlIiCcTt Day Four: Anathaym s stunned lo silence when Musogynistes turns up, 
Social Conflict is the application of verbal and sociological tech- claiming that it was Anathaym herself who opened the city gates, and staged 

niques to force a change in thinking, behaviour or social standing. the battle with the minotaur king The forged scroll he presents as conclusive 
It can take many forms and need not be direct, but may ultimately proof of has son’s innocence, which details the looting of the city, bears the 
result in injury to reputation, personal honour, codes of conduct, wax impression of Anathaym’s own _famalial seal ring. Misogynistes wins a 
and so on. Various techniques are utilised which include trading critical whalst Anathaym fails entirely. 
insults, spreading rumours, uncovering scandals, personal argument, With has 100%, the senate finds the Champion of Meeros guilty of 
open debate, betrayal of secrets, and anything else one side or the Treason, the murder of Xenos, and attempted Regicide. She is sentenced to be 
other come up with. stoned to death immediately, before the senate house. 

The key recommendation for Games Masters is to roleplay, as Howeven, as the senators rise the sacred statue of Myceras groans with 
far as possible, social conflict situations. However there are many cyclopean displeasure, and topples as an earthquake strikes the ciby... 
players who feel uncomfortable of immersing themselves to this 
degree and prefer a mechanical method, more akin to combat, to And so Anathaym’s Saga concludes. For now... 

287



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

roll against the relevant social skill, and accumulate the result course place captured characters at some disadvantage, but will not 
for that particular period of sparring: unduly injure them. 
Critical: 50% The point at which Games Masters need to be careful is when 
Success: 25% placing traps intended to maim or kill in his scenario. Such devices 
Failure : 0% are not always intended to be easily bypassed or avoided. After all, 
Fumble: —25% it would be crass stupidity for the tomb of a powerful king to have 

& The first side to reach 100% or more wins the conflict, with traps which can be circumvented, since there is no reason for anyone 
any excess above 100 reflecting a greater degree of outcome. to enter the sepulchre once the dead ruler is interred. A palace trea- 
If the contest ends in stalemate, with two or more participants sury on the other hand, may need to be opened on a regular basis 
ending with the same 100%-+ score, then the Games Master and thus requires some secretive method of safe entry. 
has the option of permitting the contest to end in an unre- A properly designed death-trap should be — once triggered — 
solved standoff; or the leading contestants can make a straight utterly lethal otherwise it is not performing its function correctly. 
opposed roll between them, the victor of the roll winning the This however may be of little consolation to players whose charac- 
contest. ters have just been crushed to bloody pulp or lie at the bottom of a 

& The outcome may not be clear-cut, depending on the pit transfixed by stakes. When using such traps to guard important 
intended result, and will depend on whether the method of locations and treasures, the Games Master should provide plenty of 
invoking social conflict is direct or indirect. warning that ‘no man has ever returned from entering’ the infamous 

place. Clues can be placed in ancient scrolls describing its legend, 
This system can be applied to just about any form of social inter- 

carved across the entry as dire curses or even passed down by word 
action — not just conflict; attempting to seduce someone, for instance. 

of mouth by storytellers and burglars. 
The abstracted timeframe allows for actions that might take weeks 

No matter how deadly the trap, there should always be some 
to be condensed into a few minutes of dice rolls, hopefully supported 

method of escaping its effect, even if this is merely diving back the 
by some roleplaying to help add flavour, and not reduce something 

way they came. This is not the same as circumventing the trap, 
of fundamental importance to a purely mechanistic exercise. 

merely avoiding the worst of what occurs when it is set off. Yet 
Characters can change the skill used from one round to the next, 

because of the binary nature of resistance rolls in MYTHRAS, inju- 
as long as the skill is appropriate to the direction of the interac- 

ry-inflicting traps should be used sparingly as characters will even- 
tion. For instance, a character could start a debate with Influence 

tually fail their roll; although Luck Points can add considerably to 
in the first round, change to Oratory in the next, and then back 

survivability. 
to Influence in the third. Games Masters can force such a change 

Since most traps are but a single use, characters should some- 
depending on how the social conflict needs to play out, and how the 

times encounter traps which have already been sprung — often with 
outcome has been framed. In this example, the first round might 

the remains of a previous victim still caught upon them. This is 
simulate persuading a senator to table a motion before the senate. 

more relevant to traps built in long forgotten or abandoned places, 
In the second round the character is called upon to give a speech 

rather that those still frequented by living folks. In fact nothing pre- 
laying out his reasons; and in the third, the character must return to 

vents a scenario being designed around a necropolis of previously 
persuasion to swing the crucial vote in his favour. 

sprung traps with no active ones left, simply to unnerve the charac- 
ters. Conversely tomb maintenance could be the duty of a nearby 
cult or brotherhood, to ensure that the secrets of such places remain 

UssIinNgG TRrAaPpSs unsullied by acts of desecration. 
Due to the considerable investment of time (and sometimes 

Traps are a traditional element of tomb raiding or the protection 
money) required to construct traps, especially larger scaled devices, 

of famous treasures. Although their prevalence in Sword & Sorcery 
belies their actual rarity in historical record, this should not prevent it should be reasonably rare to encounter multiple incidences of 

the Games Master from using them as an important element of their them. Building a sprawling death-trap dungeon for example would 

scenarios. Some degree of thought should be given to the occur- require years of effort and a modest fortune to pay the workers, but 
to what purpose? There would be little chance of suppressing the 

rence, purpose and deadliness of traps however. 
The most commonplace traps are merely warning devices, used fact that the dungeon existed and rumours concerning its precise 

to alert guardians of whatever has been trapped. Scattering dried secrets might escape, unless of course all of its labourers were slain. 

leaves around a campsite or balancing a chair against the door of Depending on its ultimate intention, this might not be an issue. 
The constructor of a death-trap dungeon might wish for people 

a rented room in a tavern, are traps designed to reveal the presence 
to hear of its infamy, drawing them to an annual festival where 

of stalkers or thieves. These are good challenges to place against 
adventurers compete to survive the dungeon for the promise of a 

characters since the only outcome is the revelation of their presence, 
leaving them free to negotiate or flee as the circumstances denote. priceless reward. Equally the dungeon may guard the entrance to a 

royal necropolis, and its fame spread far and wide by display of dead 
Ensnaring traps are more often used by hunters to capture prey, 

thieves outside its entry — freely advertised and unguarded — to ensure 
usually for the purpose of gathering food. Yet pits, snares and drop- 

few ever try once the reputation of its deadliness is established. 
ping portcullises can just as easily be used against characters. They 
are also good to use against characters, especially when the noise 
of their triggering attracts those that set them, preventing sapient 
victims from freeing themselves or being freed by others. This will of 

288



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

consideration is language. If different races have trouble com- 
CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs AaSs PLlAaYyEerR municating, this can also lead to tensions and difficulties. 

& TIs the creature suitable? Some of the creatures in MyTHRAS 
CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs are intended to be non-player characters: contacts, arch-vil- 
A great deal of fun can be had with non-human characters, and lains, boss-monsters, and so on. A Gorgon, for example, 

one of the beauties of MYTHRAS is that just about any race can be would never make a suitable player character simply due to 
used in this way. Players will, no doubt, flip through the Creatures its nature and powers. This, again, comes back to the adage 
chapter and petition the Games Master to play an Ogre, Minotaur, that just because a creature can be played as a character, it 
or even a Gorgon or Dragon. What is a beleaguered Games Master does not mean that it should — or was even intended to be. 
to do? 

Just because a creature can be played as a character does not 
CuuULltTuURrEe,, CAaRrEeEeRrSs aAnNDd DEeVvEeLloOPpmMEeNnTt 

mean that it should. The Games Master is always the final arbiter and 
Where a non-human race is acceptable, the Creatures chapter 

even uncontroversial choices, such as dwarves and elves, may not be 
offers some guidance on developing a species with an appropriate 

in keeping with the flavour of a campaign. The Games Master must 
culture, career, and so forth. Where such guidance does not exist, 

base his decision on the following considerations: 
the character creation rules are flexible enough to be applied to just 

& How well does a particular race fit with the nature and themes about any race without special rules or requirements. Choose a cul- 
of the campaign? Any creature but humans would be out of tural background that reflects the creature’s type, a profession that 

place in an historical setting for instance. Whereas a high fan- fits with its description and culture, and then continue the character 

tasy campaign could be assumed to have one or more elder creation process as for humans. Where a species has character devel- 
races (a common high fantasy theme). opment notes included, use these in preference to the human char- 

& TIs the creature sapient? Sapience denotes free will, informed acter creation system; you may also find that these notes fit several 

decision-making and the capacity to act in a rational, judg- other species and they need not be considered unique or restricted. 

mental way rather than one based on instinct. Sapient char- 
acters are far casier to relate to and therefore play, than those 
which are merely sentient. Of course, some sentient creatures 
may have been raised to sapience through magic or other MAaGgIiCc 

What types of magic are used and how common they are, are 
means, and therefore be applicable for play, but generally true 
sapience is the key. specific to the campaign. A magically rich campaign could have all 

& What is the creature’s level of power when compared with five of the magical disciplines whereas a low-magic campaign might 

the rest of the characters? As a rule of thumb, Games Mas- have only one, reflecting a single, dominant power in the universe. 

ters should deter players from choosing creatures that are Games Masters must carefully consider how prevalent magic will be 

clearly much more powerful than the other characters. The in the world before allowing players to develop magic-using charac- 

casiest way to measure power levels are to compare attri- ters. Not all of the magical disciplines need to be used, and indeed, 

butes. Creatures with substantially more Action Points, sig- some uniquely interesting combinations can be created by mixing 

nificantly higher Damage Modifiers, high Hit Points and nat- and matching them. 

ural armour, will have a large advantage over more modest With five separate magic systems Games Masters have a great 

character types. This can prove to be difficult when it comes deal of choice when it comes to deciding what types and levels of 

to balancing encounters for the whole party and it may also magic should be present in the campaign. Some points for all Games 
Masters to consider: 

cause resentment amongst other players — especially if, in 
combat situations, the creature character clearly hogs the & What is magic’s presence? Is it extremely rare and in 
limelight. the hands of only a few, fabled practitioners, or is it more 

& How will the creature fit in with other races? Both Games common-place? 
Masters and players need to consider questions of prejudice, & Ts magic a specialised art, relegated to members of only a few 
social acceptance, and general logistics of mixing races in careers that dedicate their lives to its pursuit? Or is it possible 
the same group. A group may find it is barred or banished for all careers to learn magic in some form, irrespective of 
from many areas if it contains a troll or chaos hybrid in its how rare it is? 
number; worse, it may attract attacks from those who seek to & How is magic viewed by most societies? If magic is relatively 
stigmatise and punish difference. A group with a giant as a rare then the chances are that most people will view it with 
member will likely strike terror from many kilometres away awe, respect and, perhaps, suspicion and fear. If it is more 
and, even if they do not, find that the giant character simply common then magic may be something that, whilst remark- 
cannot enter a city’s walls due to its size, thereby causing the able in its own way, is an accepted part of daily life. 
player to sit-out much of the fun. Another consideration is 
that of tolerance within the group. Different races have radi- Which of the magic systems will be represented in your 

cally different views regarding morality, and these might be so campaign? 

disparate as to lead to intra-party conflict and strife. A further Folk Magic — magic may be restricted to very simple, local effects 
that are understood primarily by hedge wizards, witches, wise men 
and women, and so on. Much is based on folk-lore and a deep 
understanding of the natural world, coupled with certain powers 

289



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

that may be inherited through a bloodline or awoken through expo- some form of ruling class, which will, eventually, seek to con- 
sure to such knowledge. solidate and protect its position. How does this influence the 

Anmimism — the spirits are vital entities to the world and com- lower social strata? Is magic used to control the populace or 
munion with them a natural part of life. Whilst animists are often oppress them? Do certain forms of magic corrupt spiritually 
viewed as primitive, there are many civilised and sophisticated soci- and morally? Have other magical paths been forgotten but 
eties practicing animism, such as the Shinto religion of Japan. could be awoken in some way? 

Mpysticism — ascetics seek to enlighten themselves through a per- 
sonal understanding of reality and control over their bodies’ unre- 
alised potential. Mysticism is prevalent in many cultured societies 
that have their basis in reason, rationality and deep philosophical CuulLltTs AanNDd 
understanding. Mysticism is not necessarily a religious path though, 
and may be found in many secular societies. BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs iInN 

Sorcery — sorcery implies that mortals have mastered the arcane 
laws of the universe and bend them to their will. The gods may not tThHEe CAaMmPpAaIigGnN 
exist, may be absentee landlords, or their worship has diminished to The Cults chapter provides an extensive range of bare-bones cults 
the point that they cease to be relevant. Sorcerers, especially the very for Games Masters to develop, depending, of course, on whether or 
powerful ones, may be looking to fill this gap, and assume a godhead not cults form an important part of the campaign. Although cults 
role themselves. This is a typical trope of most Sword and Sorcery. have always been an integral part of MYTHRAS, there is no need to 

Theism — this implies that the gods exist, and are prepared to make them the focus of attention or indeed, even include them at 
allow their powers to be channelled and used by mortals in return all. There are some excellent reasons for their inclusion: history and 
for worship. This is typical of many ancient myths and religions, par- fantasy include many cult examples, and some ancient societies were 
ticularly those of the ancient world such as India and Mesoamerica. defined by them. But some settings may use cults very differently: 

Whatever combination of styles you choose for your campaign— 
and there is no need to have all five present, unless you desire a truly & Cults may be rare or difficult to join, being restricted to 

magic-rich campaign — study the magic systems carefully: certain cultures, social classes, or careers. Only a small elite 
might be entitled to progress through the cult ranks. 

& Understand how they work and what powers they grant to & Some fantasy genres — Swords and Sorcery in particular — 
their practitioners. Reading a spell on its own is not enough: depict the universe as a cold, uncaring place where the gods 
the mechanics for each magic system can enhance an individ- are largely absent, and cults are reserved for a tiny minority 
ual spell’s effect considerably. who are bent on achieving power at all costs. In such cases 

& Do different cultures practice different magical traditions? cults are the province of powerful non-player characters (typ- 
Experiment with different themes. Perhaps the barbarians of ically malevolent sorcerers), and form the focus of characters’ 
the steppes are masters of sorcery whilst the civilised cultures opposition. 
cleave to spirit worship. Maybe only the superstitious primi- & Worship of gods simply has little or no overt organization. 
tive tribes believe in the gods whilst the nomads - arch-sur- Worship is personal and although temples and clerical classes 
vivalists — have developed many mystical traditions to aid in exist, there 13 no established hierarchy of progression outside 
their daily life. of a purely clerical career — which may be highly restrictive in 

& Choose what spells will be made available. Games Masters terms of adventuring. 
should not feel compelled to make every spell listed for a magic & In worlds or settings where magic is rare or absent, cults 
type available. Some will be unknown, rare, or extremely dif- are purely a social mechanism rather than one that offers 
ficult to learn. Some will not be appropriate to the flavour of benefits for its initiates: cults therefore provide background 
the campaign. Build your own spell lists. Doing so will help colour rather than an integral game mechanic for magical 
manage players’ expectations when choosing magic, and give development. 
the Games Master control over magic that could be overly 
powerful in a campaign’s early stages. You can always expand So, give some thought to the place and role of cults in the cam- 

your list later. Indeed, magical research can be a very good paign. Many settings— and some published specifically for MyTH- 

driver for certain scenarios. RAS — will use them extensively, whilst others may include them to a 

& Decide what magic will be available to characters at char- much lesser degree. Brotherhoods, on the other hand, are likely to 

acter creation. Do characters need to join a cult to learn be far more common: people, being social animals, naturally form 

higher magic? Can they choose magic-using careers from brotherhoods and societies for mutual support, advancement and 

the very start, and develop cult membership (or some other protection. Brotherhoods can effectively replace cults in some set- 

form of magical education) as a part of character creation? tings, or happily co-exist with them. 

Should they have any magic at all? Might gaining access to it, If cults are to be used, they require a little work. Cults can be as 

through adventuring and experience, be the route to magical detailed or as nebulous as one desires; but to get the very most from 

power? Many fantasy stories use this premise very success- 
fully as a way of showing individual journeys of discovery 
and realisation. 

& Consider what consequences a magical type will have on the 
world. Magic is a path to power, and all paths to power lead to 

290



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

a cult, the following framework elements can be used as the basis for 
HiistToORrYy AanNDd COoNnTtEeXxTt 

developing a fully-realised cult. 
What is the history behind the cult? What role does it play in 

& Concept society? Much depends on the cult’s size, but small cults can be very 
& Object of Veneration powerful in a local area, and large ones weak when their influence is 
& History and Context spread across distances. 
& Myths 

& Who founded the cult, or how did it come into being? 
& Magic and Powers 
& Obligations and Deficits & When was it founded — recently or long ago? 

& How has it maintained its position — has it changed over time? 
& Membership and Ranks 

& Does the cult have enemies? What other cults is it affiliated 
« Training 

with? 
When developing a cult, approach each element in order, allow- & Ts the cult part of a pantheon? How does it contribute to the 

ing ideas to build, based on the decisions made for the preceding overall myths of that pantheon? 
element. Although the following steps are phased specifically for cult & Does the cult worship differently, or believe different things to 
organisations, the same elements can be applied for the creation of similar cults? If so, is it considered heretical? 
Brotherhoods too. & What social services does the cult offer to its lay members? Is 

it a beneficent cult or inherently selfish? Does it care a jot for 
the welfare of others? 

COoNnCcEePpTt 
& What is the cult’s future? Are new members being attracted 

What is the basis of the cult? Is it a formal religion covering an 
or is its influence on the wane? Are new beliefs eroding old 

empire, a nation, a community or a small body of people? Is it, 
ones from within? 

perhaps, outside of an over-arching religion due to a difference of 
belief, although agreeing with it on most aspects of orthodoxy? Is The history and context should be a narrative that addresses 
the god living or dead? Is the god represented by a prophet or ideal some, or all, of the above questions. Again, it need not be too com- 
that forms the basis of the belief? Is the cult focused on worshipping plex or detailed, growing instead through game play and continued 
a particular aspect of a god’s nature? Is the focus of the cult a char- Games Master development. 
ismatic individual who might become a god? Or is it a personality 
of such heroic, charismatic stature that veneration is the only way to 

MyyYtThHSs 
show the appropriate love and respect? 

Many cults have myths. A myth is a story or set of stories that 
The concept need not be detailed, but it needs to have a sub- 

describe and exemplify what the cult stands for and how it behaves. 
stantive hook for the rest of the framework. It might be as simple as 

Myths are, typically, timeless and concern the deeds of gods or the 
a sentence, or a more detailed paragraph or so that clearly outlines 

object of veneration. They may be considered unassailable truths, 
the concept. Do not feel compelled to go into too much conceptual 

or stories that provide a meaning or parable, but are known to be a 
detail. Concepts change over time, so if the concept is relatively sim- 

work of fiction. The important fact is that a myth explains, teaches 
ple and straightforward, it is easier for characters to understand and 

and promotes the ethics, values and behaviours of the cult. 
depth will come through active gameplay. 

Myths can be as simple or elaborate as the Games Master wishes 
them to be. Many myths concern the eternal questions of: 

OBbJjEeCcTt oOFf VEeNnEeRrAaTtIioOnN 
Ciults are usually formed to venerate someone or something. The & How was the world made? 

object of veneration for the cult — its heart and focus — should be & How did people come into being? 

defined. There are many different kinds of objects for veneration & How does the venerated being handle certain challenges and 

but the most common are: problems? 
& How were enemies defeated? 

& A single god or goddess — such as Zeus, Odin or Gurghul & How will the world follow its course and how might it end? 
the Avenging God of Foetid Mists. Or a group of gods and & What does the object of veneration do for me? 
goddesses — a pantheon. 

& An aspect of a god or goddess’s nature — one particular form Itis usually the case that no one knows who created the myth and 

of behaviour that adherents find sacred. how it came into being; a myth simply is — whether written down or 

& Someone who embodies both the nature of mortals and gods communicated through word of mouth. Myths are typically unques- 

— a demigod. tioned (although the myths of other cults, especially where they 

& A holy prophet or messenger. conflict with a cult’s own myths, may certainly be challenged, even 

& A creature or monster of singular power A charismatic indi- violently), even when it is known that much is fabrication, because 

vidual, either living or dead, who inspires love and devotion the power of the lesson is inherent in the myth’s structure. It is easier 

— a Personality or Hero cult to reinforce behaviour if one tells a story to show that behaviour 

& A philosophy of existence leading to some form of unearthly in action, rather than simply listing a set of rules and restrictions. 

reward — Buddhism, for instance. Children are particularly receptive to the power of myth, and cults 

& An object or relic of power or significance. ensure that myths form a part of a child’s education so that patterns 
of behaviour and belief can be established early-on. 

291



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

Myths become ingrained into the psyche and enforce certain Initiation involves a ritual of some form. The precise nature can 
patterns of behaviour. Stronger myths are more successful at this. be defined as part of the cult framework, and can take any of a 
Tor every myth created, decide what forms of behaviour it seeks to number of forms: some examples are: 
exemplify. These should be simple, clear statements such as... 

& Initiation ritual involving much pomp or ceremony, such as a 
& Lying is wrong communion rite, baptism or other, symbolic acceptance into 
& Bravery is necessary the cult’s ways 
& Tricksters cannot be trusted & Trial or ordeal 
& Hospitality to enemies and friends is essential & Vigil, fasting or abstinence 
& Hard work provides the best rewards & Swearing of a binding oath 

& Making a sacrifice 

MAaGgIiCc Performing the initiation ritual can either be a focus of a role- 
playing session, or, for simplicity, abstracted to a roll against a par- 

What magic can a cult offer to its members? This is dependent 
ticular skill (such as Endurance, Willpower, or a Passion). Once the 

on a number of things: 
Initiation rite is complete, and if the initiate meets any prerequisites 

& Whether or not the cult reveres a god, personality or ideal — for membership, then he is considered a Dedicated Member. 
the latter two cannot offer Theist Magic, but may be able to 
offer Animism, Mysticism, Sorcery or Folk Magic. 

TRrAaIinNIinNgG 
& If the cult offers Magic to its membership. Some cults don’t 

Clults may teach skills as part of the rewards offered to their 
provide any magic at all, or limit it to those of higher cult 

active members, and look for certain skills when recruiting mem- 
rank than the common members. 

bers. The kinds of skills offered reflect two things: the cult’s nature 

The sample cults in the Cults and Brotherhoods chapter give and purpose (pious, peaceful cults will focus on lore and commu- 

ample examples of the ranges of spells and types of magic available, nication skills; martial cults will offer weapon skills); and the kinds 

but Games Masters can be creative. Theist cults might also offer of qualities the focus of veneration exemplifies. Therefore, as part 

sorcery as part of their nature; or sorcery orders might also worship of the cult framework process, give some thought to the following 

a particular god who offered sorcerous knowledge as a gift. questions when choosing cult skills: 

& What skills does the object of veneration display and promote? 

OBbLlIigGAaTtIioOnNSs AanNDd DEeFfIiCcIiTtSs & What skills are used in the myths fundamental to the cult? 
Obligations and Deficits are another framework method for & What skills are important to the cult in achieving its aims? 

enforcing certain kinds of behaviour. Essentially, cult members & What skills might members naturally bring to the cult, given 
are rewarded for acting in the right ways and penalised for acting the culture and campaign background? 
against the behavioural norms of the cult. These things can take dif- 

Cults tend to offer training in order to enforce certain kinds of 
ferent forms and it is up to the Games Master to decide which (and 

behaviour, but also to make sure that the cult is equipped with what 
they can be mixed and matched) are most appropriate to the cam- 

it needs to achieve its goals and ensure its survival. Training happens 
paign and thus available as part of the Cult Framework. The Cults 

in several ways: 
chapter offers several different ways of creating obligations and defi- 
cits through the use of taboos, geases and superstitions. These are & Through dedicated training academies, supported by the cult 
regular tropes in myth and fantasy, and often used as the basis for & Through the indenturing of lower ranks to higher ones 
adventure and stories. & Through mentoring and required study 

& Natural transfers of knowledge through religious ceremonies, 

MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp AanNDd RAaNnKkSs festivals and services 

This cult framework element is of substantial importance to & Through the teaching of myths and beliefs. 

both cults and characters. It defines how people join the cult and Consider which ways are available through the cult. There is no 
what stages are open to them through cult progression. Becoming a 

need to formalise each and every academy, rite, mentor, and so on; 
member of a cult can be as simple as proclaiming worship of a god, 

simply a consideration of which methods of teaching suit the cult 
following of personality or ideal, or undergoing some form of initi- 

the best. 
ation rite. For most, this is enough for their personal requirements, 
and they will progress no further in the cult and have no desire to 
do so. RouNnDdIinNGg OuuTt tThHEe Cullt 

However, the more steadfast and devout — those who want to Having worked through this framework, you should have a good 

make a real commitment to the focus of their veneration — must idea of a cult’s focus, function, history, myths, magic and structure. It 

go somewhat beyond the Common Membership requirements and is now time to apply some finishing touches that can be used during 

become Dedicated Members. These dedicate themselves to the gameplay. None of these finishing elements are crucial, but they 

inner workings of the cult and place themselves on a track for pro- offer completeness. 

gression, allowing the cult to become the focus for their activities. 
& Roll 1d4+1 — this s the number of Holy Days the cult observes 

during the year. Atleast one day will mark the founding of the 

292



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

cult, and one will mark another major point of importance, 
reflecting a key myth or deed (such as the martyrdom of a 
prophet or hero). Decide where in your game calendar these 
Holy Days will appear and their importance to members 
of different ranks. The founding day and additional day of 
importance will be marked by all cult members; other days 
may be marked by only one rank and hold lesser significance. 
What are the ceremonies for the cult? How is worship con- 
ducted? Are ceremonies formal and highly ritualised, or are 
they loosely structured and simple in approach? Do different 
Holy Days require different ceremonies? Be as vague or as 
detailed as you wish, but assemble some notes on what cer- 
emonies usually require, using myths, history and other ele- 
ments of the cult framework to determine what they consist 
of. 
Where is the cult’s home? This might be obvious, if the cult 
is local to a small community, but large cults generally have 
a base of focus, where the major temple, church or shrine is 
located. Agree this with the Games Master. 
What happens to those who stray from the cult’s path, betray 
its ideals or attempt to leave the cult? Are magical punish- 
ments enforced? Are apostates condemned to death? Is there 
no sanction at all? Consider the cult’s nature, and outline the 
punishments, if any, for going against the cult’s ideals. Some 
cults use the threat of punishment as a propaganda tool to 
enforce behaviour but may never carry out the threat; others 
will do so rigorously and publicly. 

293



