Mythras:  Combat

— — — 
= YY S R (R < > 

Yy m KI n S LUK SO GO << A o IR UL AR | < A < 

Combat

— — 
BoH5 X = oM ¥ §row moKl T S I &K E B« r T X W 

ombat is an important feature of MYTHRAS. Violent con- 
frontation has ever been a way of settling problems, from COoMmPpOoNnEeNnTtSs 

C vengeance driven fights between nemeses, to the clash of 
armies in times of war. Combat need not be a savage battle to the oOFf COoMmBbAaTt 
death. Some combat encounters can be swashbuckling duels which MyYTHRAS uses a number of terms and concepts to explain the 

end without injury, or perhaps light-hearted bar room brawls. core elements of Combat. These are explained in the following sec- 

There are a number of central concepts which are an inherent tions, but in overview, these are: 

part of MYTHRAS combat: 
COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 

& Combat can be a very deadly business: Even the greatest The skill of wielding a group of weapons learned as part of a 
hero can be hacked down if seriously outnumbered, receive culture or profession. 
grievous wounds if abjuring armour, or suffer ‘the slings and 
arrows of outrageous fortune’ if luck turns her back. ComBbAaTt ROoUuNnDdSs 
Combat need not end in death: Although commonplace in Book keeping time segments of five seconds each. 

some genres, battles do not have to conclude with the demise 
of opponents. It is as easy to end a fight with the submission CoMmBbAaTt ACcTtIioONnSs 
or capture of a foe without necessarily killing them. Possible acts a character can perform during a round by the 

Combat is both abstract and tactical: Whilst the rules are not expenditure of an Action Point. 

specifically designed for tabletop miniatures, tactical manoeu- 
WEeAaPpOoNn S1izZeE AanNDd REeAaCchH 

vres and techniques are a vital part of how combat plays. A 
How difficult it is to parry a particular weapon, and the distance 

comprehensive range of options exist to take advantage of 
it can engage at. 

the situation if one participant gains the upper hand over 
another. 

EnNGgAaGgEemMEeNnTt 
Combat is exciting: Since combat is inherently dangerous, 

Combatants can hit or be hit by a direct opponent, depending 
a well orchestrated duel or melee will exhilarate players; the 

on circumstances. 
advantage swinging to and fro with innovative use of tactical 
choices and techniques. 

SPpEeCcIiaALl EFfFfEeCcTtSs 

MyTHRAS combat can be either gritty or cinematic: The rules Special combat manoeuvres which can be performed if one 

allow for the emulation of any genre, from the grim realism as combatant gains the upper hand. 

recounted from Viking Sagas to the highly visceral encounters in 
works of fantasy — such as written by Howard, Leiber or Gemmell 
— and mythological epics like the Iliad or Mahabharata. Whatever COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 
the setting, MYTHRAS is designed to handle all such confrontations. 

Fighting skills are purchased as styles. Each style is a ‘package’ of 
Whatever the intent of participants, their armaments or the situ- 

multiple weapons, related by culture, career or even schools of com- 
ation they find themselves in, all forms of physical combat are han- 

bat, which avoids the necessity of learning each individual weapon 
dled using these rules in this chapter. 

separately. Deciding how many weapons should be included into a 
single style is ultimately a choice determined by the Games Master. 

86

= 
A5 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm’’Ss SaAgGaA 
SaAmMPpLlEe COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 

As part of her cultural background, and civic duties, Anathaym learned 
The following are Combat Styles taken from elsewhere in the MrrH- 

the Meerish Slinger style, combining the art of slinging with the close combat 
RAS rules to help act as inspirationfor developingyour own Combat Styles. 

skill in shorisword, and peltast shield. During the hot summers of her adoles- 
cence she trained as part of a skirmishing unat learning how to sling stones at 

Meerish Infantry (Spear, Hoplite Shield, Favelin) 
largets, whilst sometimes wielding a shield in her off-hand. 

Meerish Slinger (Sting, Shortsword, Peltast Shueld) 
At the same time she was also taught how to use a shortsword, again both 

Centaur Warrior (Spear;, Shield, Short Bow) 
with, and without a shield, to prepare herf or close combat if ever her unit was 

Duwarven Legionary (Axe, Hammer, Shield, Crossbow) 
ever engaged in melee during a battle. She even knows how to fight with just a 

Elven Ranger (Sword, Speas; Shzeld, Bow) 
shaeld if she ever loses her shorisword in a_fight. This adaptability holds her 

Lizardman Savage (Axe, Shortspear; Target Shield) 
in good stead, since provided she is using at least one of her cultural weapons, 

Big Hutty Things - Ogres (Club, Hammer, Thrown Rock) 
she’ll never suffer a situational penally due to her comprehensive preparation. 

Striped Death - Tger (Teeth, and Claws) 
Crushing Doom - Giant Snake (Constrict, Bute, and Writhe) 

Games Masters should avoid, if possible, replicating the same 
n 4 weapon within additional Combat Styles. If unavoidable, common 

However, some guidance is provided here to help tailor Combat sense should be applied, such as limiting the character to use the 

Styles to match a particular campaign theme. relevant Combat Style skill if the weapon is used in combination 

The most important aspect of Combat Styles is that the char- with a second weapon available only to that specific style, or permit- 

acter learns how to use each weapon in the style, both singly and ting them to use the style with the highest value when wielding that 

in combination so that they might be interchanged as necessary. particular weapon singly. Duplication of weapons simply reflects 

Combat training does not focus merely on using a specific weapon superfluous, repetitive training. 

or weapons under best conditions, but also covers what to do when Choosing how many weapons should be part of a Combat Style 

placed at a severe disadvantage. Such cross-training is a primary depends ultimately on how important combat will be within a cam- 

part of preparing a combatant for the unpredictable events of the paign. Some suggestions are: 

battlefield, where weapon breakage or becoming disarmed is always 
& Combat Styles are very exclusive: Each style pertains to one 

a potential possibility. 
particular two-handed weapon or a specific paired weapon 

Almost all characters begin with the chance to learn a cultural 
combination. Best used for combat heavy campaigns such as 

combat style. This is supposed to reflect a basic education in those 
a game focused on gladiators, where each gladiatorial type 

weapons available for a member of that society and social 
has its own precise weapon combination (net and trident for 

rank, reflecting the training given for 
example). Exclusive styles necessitate a greater investment 

community (or perhaps personal) 
of skill points during character generation, and subsequent 

defence. Thus a barbarian karl 
investment of Experience Rolls to achieve 

may be expected to know diversification, which may slow down 
how to use a spear, hand the development rate of combative 
axe, and bow — the funda- 

characters. 
mental weapons and tools 

& Combat Styles are cult or 
of a commoner; whereas a 

school specific: Each style specia- 
thane from the same commu- 

lises in a few weapons of noted 
nity, growing up with access to 

significance to a particular 
better weapons, may be trained 

cult or school of combat. 
in swords, spears, and shields 

An evil brotherhood of 
instead. 

assassins may, for example, 
Some careers such as hunter 

train in unusual signature 
or warrior offer the option to learn 

weapons like blowpipes and 
further styles. These should reflect 

garrottes. Schools of combat 
more unusual weapons, or weap- might reflect the battlefield 
ons normally restricted from 

armaments of a mercenary 
someone not of their profession. 

company, or an ascetic martial 
So continuing the previous 

arts school. The suggested num- 
example, if the karl decided 

ber of weapons should range from 
to become a mercenary he 

two to three per style. 
might learn a new style, 

& Combat Styles are career 
diversifying  his compe- 

specific: Each style is limited to the core 
tence to include glaives, 

weapons used by a professional combat- 
great axes, and thrown 

ant of that career, for example a legionary 
axes. 

soldier should demon- 
strate competence in 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

shortsword, dagger, scutum, and javelin. The number and an inbuilt technical advantage the style offers for those particular sit- 
type of weapons should roughly match those of a similar his- uations. However, a trait is only intended to be used with the weap- 
torical context, between three or four per style. ons and situations of that particular style. 
Combat Styles are weapon class based: Each style incorpo- There are limitless diverse and potential benefits a Combat Style 
rates every weapon of a particular design or damage type. An can enjoy. The adjacent table merely suggests a few possibilities, and 
example may be ‘All Swords’, incorporating everything from is intended to offer flavour rather than overwhelming tactical advan- 
shortswords to greatswords; or ‘Bludgeoning Weapons’ cover- tage. Games Masters are encouraged to create further ones to match 
ing clubs, hammers, maces, and anything else which relies on their campaign setting. 
bashing to inflict damage. As can be surmised, these catego- Note that some of these benefits can potentially be applied, by 
ries can potentially include dozens of weapons. extension, to the Unarmed skill —either learned via culture or added 
Combat Styles are all-encompassing: These styles are inclu- later as part of a profession. 
sive of any, and all melee weapons, ranged weapons or both. 
This option is only recommended for campaigns where com- 

Usse oFf WEeAaPpOoNnSs NOoTt 
bat is infrequent, secondary to other forms of interaction. 

Covered by a Combat Style
It should be obvious that not all Combat Styles will be equal, or OVERED BY A OMBAT TYLE 

Occasionally characters may be forced to pick up an unfamil- 
necessarily need to balance with one another. Such considerations 

iar weapon, using it either independently or in conjunction with a 
are intended to be based on culture, social class and career — not be 

trained weapon. A character with a Sword and Shield style might, 
limited by game mechanics. 

for example, be forced to use a mace, or mace and shield together. 
By rights, using an untrained weapon forces the user to fight at 

WEeAaPpOoNn CHhOoIiCcEeSs his base Combat Style percentage. However, much depends on the 
When deciding on which particular weapons are included within weapon and how similar it is to something the user is experienced 

a Combat Style the following should be considered: with. Some guidelines on using unfamiliar weapons are as follows: 

& Two handed weapons generally have an advantage in both & If a weapon is substantially different from a trained weapon — 
terms of weapon reach (see page 61), and how much damage in weight, size, length and method of use — then offensive and 
they inflict, but leave the wielder vulnerable if the weapon defensive actions are made at the base Combat Style skill (ie, 
is lost. STR+DEX). 
Shields are the best defensive weapons, able to block fairly If a weapon is reasonably different from a trained weapon — say 
large weapons in addition to protecting against ranged attacks a greatsword when the combatant is trained with a broad- 
- which other weapons cannot normally parry. sword — then offensive and defensive actions are based on the 
Using two offensive weapons simultancously offers the existing Combat Style but are two grades more difficult. 
wielder a greater range of engagement distances and grants If a weapon is broadly similar to a trained weapon — say a 
some security if one weapon is broken, dropped or disarmed shortsword when the combatant is trained with a broadsword 
during combat. Secondary off-hand weapons must be at least — then offensive and defensive actions are one grade more 
one size category smaller than the main weapon, unless both difficult. 
are small. If a weapon is sumilar to a trained weapon — a scimitar say, as 
Ranged weapons grant the ability to strike from beyond the opposed to a broadsword — then the character uses his exist- 
immediate reach of an enemy, typically at the cost of a lower ing Combat Style with no penalty. 
rate of attack unless using anachronistic firearms or sorcerous If a combatant is using an unfamiliar weapon in conjunction 
devices. A Combat Style could potentially include unusual with a trained weapon, such as a shield, then the trained Com- 
weapons such as siege engines. bat Style is used, but is one grade harder. This simulates the 
Unarmed combat styles allow the user the opportunity to compensation in the overall style the combatant must make 
fight and defend themselves without the need of weapons. (adjusting balance, accounting for heft, and so on) necessary 
They are also useful in situations where an opponent has to use a combination of trained and untrained weapons. 
closed inside the reach of a wielded weapon. An unarmed The penalty imposed by use of an unfamiliar weapon cannot 
attack can be made with any part of the body, except for the reduce the user’s skill below the default level of STR+DEX. 
torso. Thus limbs, wings, tails and even the head can be used. 

COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEe BEeNnEeFfIiTtSs CoMmBbAaTt ROoUuNnDdSs 
Combat styles possess another function beyond simply learning a 

To emphasise its visceral nature, MYTHRAS combat is tracked on 
group of weapon skills. Since each style is taught by a particular cul- 

a blow by blow basis. In order to ease bookkeeping but still reflect 
ture or career, they are inherently optimised for the environment or 

the differences in speed or numbers of attacks, fights are broken 
military tactics that group normally fights with; for instance a horse 

down into Combat Rounds of five seconds each. During this period 
nomad learns to fight from the saddle, or an infantryman trains to 

combatants may make hand-to-hand attacks or defend against 
fight in close order formation. Therefore, as an additional bonus, 

them, manoeuvre into and out of combat, fire or throw a ranged 
every Combat Style may gain one or more traits which grant it an 

weapon, and so on. 
advantage under certain circumstances. This can be thought of as 

38



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEe TRrAaIiTtSs 

Trait Description 

Assassination Allows the user access to the normally restricted “Kill Silently” special effect. 

If the fighter’s Damage Modifier is two or more steps greater than his opponent’s, his weapon is considered one size larger for the purposes of 
Batter Aside 

bypassing parries. 

Beast-back Lancer Performing a mounted charge with this combat style does not incur the one step difficulty penalty to hit. 

Blind Fighting Allows user to ignore any penalties imposed due to poor lighting or temporary blinding. 

Cautious Fighter Can use the Change Range action to automatically withdraw from engagement with no need to roll 

Chariot Fighting Style allows those riding in a chariot to ignore the skill cap placed upon their combat rolls by the driver’s Drive skill. 

Daredevil May use Evade to dodge blows in hand to hand combat without ending up prone. 

Defensive Minded Increases the Size of your weapon when parrying by one step, provided no offensive action is taken that round. 

Do or Die Allows dual weapon combinations to use the Flurry special effect, provided that each subsequent attack utilises the alternating weapon. 

Excellent Footwork When fighting on slippery, wobbling surfaces the user can ignore the skill cap placed on combat rolls by the Acrobatics skill. 

Permits a group of three or more warriors to draw into close formation, placing more open or disordered opponents at a disadvantage (provided 
Formation Fighting* 

the “unit’ cannot be outflanked), and thus reducing each foe’s Action Points by one if they engage. 

Allows the user to utilise seemingly innocuous objects noted as part of the style as deadly weapons, with no chance of accidental breakage despite 
Hidden Weapons 

apparent delicacy (fans or musical instruments for example). 

Style encourages frequent yells and bellows in combat to intimidate foes, making any psychological resistance rolls inflicted on an opponent one 
Intimidating Scream 

grade harder. 

Knockout Blow When attacking with surprise treat any Stun Location as lasting minutes instead of turns. 

The styyle le g grants its user an advantag=e  when entanglgilnng g or immobilising g opOppp!o nents, making g a foe’s opPpPo sed rolls to evade or break free one 
Mancatcher 

difficulty grade harder. 

Mounted Combat Style allows rider to ignore the skill cap placed upon combat rolls by the Ride skill. 

Ranged Marksman When using a ranged weapon, shift a random Hit Location roll to an adjoining body location. 

Permits clubs and axes to roll the weapon’s damage twice and pick the best result, but only when using the Damage Weapon special effect against 
Shield Splitter 

shields. 

Allows a group of three or more shield users to overlap their protection, adding one to the number of locations which can be protected with 
Shield Wall* 

passive blocking and resisting Knockback, Leaping attacks, and Bash as if using the Brace action. 

The style permits its user to ignore the skill cap placed upon combat rolls by the Athletics skill when making assaults whilst scaling walls or crawling 
Siege Warfare 

through tunnels. 

Skirmishing The style permits launching ranged attacks whilst at a run (but not whilst sprinting). 

Style allows the user to engage in attacks and evades made whilst jumping or swinging into (or disengaging from) combat, ignoring any skill cap 
Swashbuckling 

placed on it by the Athletics skill. 

Throw Weapons Any nominal melee weapon in the style can also be thrown at no penalty to skill, but when used in this way a weapon’s damage roll is halved. 

Intended for styles which emphasise fighting in close coordination with an animal companion (such as trained birds of prey, pet wolves, and so on), 
Trained Beast 

the user may utilise any of his Action Points to defend against attacks launched at his beast. 

Unarmed Prowess Permits the user to treat his Unarmed blocks and parries as ‘Medium’ sized, enabling him to better defend himself from armed opponents. 

Water Combat The style allows its user to ignore the skill cap placed on combat rolls by the Swim skill. 

* Requires everyone else in the group to also have this benefit, otherwise the coordinated effortfails to lack of one or more participants being trained in the correct 
technique. 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Anathaym s trained in two separate Combat Styles, Meerish Slinger, and Meerish Infantry. Afiler considering the options available, the Games Master decides 

lo grant the Meerish Slinger style the Skirmisting trait, and the Meerish Infantry style the Formation Fighting trait. Thus her cultural and career styles now look 
like this: 

Meerish Shinger: (Skirmishing) sling, shortsword and peltast shield 
Meerish Infantry: (Formation Fighting) spear; hoplite shield and javelin 

Note that Anathaym s limated to ranged weapon skirmishing with her sling, andf ormationf ighting with spear and large shield. During the hundreds of hours she 
trained in combat, she only ever practiced slinging at a running gait, sincej avelin throwing was learned as part of being a close ordered unat. Simalarly she learned the 
lactics of fighting shoulder to shoulder only whilst using a spear and large hoplite shield, and wouldn’tf eel comfortable trying to fight as a_formation with a shorter 
weapon and smaller shield. 

39



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
On the plains outside the city Anathaym is practicing with shortsword and 

shield against her weapons tutor, Master Lamothis. Both she and her mentor 
have 3 Action Points each, but Anathaym rolls a better initiative. Goingf urst 
she decides to attack (Proactwe, 1 Action Point) which Zamothis effortlessly 
deflects (Reactive, 1 Action Point). Thus far they have each used one Action 
Point — Anathaym to attack and Zamotlus to parry. Then it s her mentor’s 
turn, and he returns with an attack (Proactve, 1 Action Point), forcing her to 
block (Reactive, 1 Action Point). Now they have used two Action Points each. 

Both have now taken their respective turns, but each stll has a Combat 
Action remaining; so the Games Master cycles back to the highest initiative 
again; allowing Anathaym lo attack a second time that round. Zamothis again 
parries the blow and the round ends, since neither has any Action Points 
remaining. Thus going furst allowed Anathaym to use her actions to attack 
twice and parry once. 

CAaLlCcUuLlAaTtIinNgG InNIitTIiaAtTIivVeE 
Initiative is calculated by each participant rolling 1d10 and add- 

ing their Initiative Bonus. Whoever gained the highest result acts 
first, followed by the second highest, and so on. When two or more 
participants tie scores they act concurrently. 

InNIitTiIaAtTIivVeE PEeNnAaLlTtYy 
Characters who wear armour are hindered by the encum- 

brance of their protection, slowed by its inherent mass and bulk. As 
described on page 58, a penalty is applied to Initiative equal to the 
total ENC for all the armour worn, divided by 5, and rounded up. 
Tor example, a full suit of Hoplite Plate armour, covering all seven 

Similarly to real life, most combat engagements — once joined hit locations, with an ENC value of 4 per location, imposes an Ini- 

— are concluded in a matter of seconds rather than minutes. In tiative penalty of (7x4)/5 = 6. 

game terms this means several Combat Rounds (usually three or 
less) unless participants withdraw to perhaps reset initiative, reassess CYyCcLlEeSs AanNDd TUuRrNnSs 
their tactical situation or simply to grab a momentary rest before Once initiative has been determined, the participants have the 
re-engaging. Only fights between well matched foes or sequences of potential to perform several Combat Actions during each Combat 
opponents tend to last longer. Round. The number of times they can act is equal to their Action 

Combat Rounds use several important terms: Points, but when they can act is limited to whether the action is pro- 

& Initiative: The order of who acts when during a Cycle of a active or reactive. 

Combat Round. Proactive actions can only be attempted on the character’s own 

& Cycle: The countdown through initiative values from the Turn; that is to say, when it is his initiative. Proactive actions are 

highest to the lowest, so that each participant has a chance to those in which the character is the instigator, such as making an 

take their Turn when their number is reached. There can be 
several cycles per Combat Round. ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 

& Turn: Upon each turn, participants perform a Combat As Master Zamothis continues hus lesson Anathaym notices three bel- 
Action, which comprises of a declaration, any necessary dice lLgerent centawrs, armed with bows, gallop out of a nearby gorge lowards 
rolls (including reactions), and the resolution of the action. them. She cries out a warning and interposes herself between her momentardly 

surprised mentor and the approaching raiders. 
Fach term is described in more detail, below. 

All three centaurs roll higher initiatives than Anathaym. Each one, on 
us turn, spends an Action Point to fire an arrow at the female warrwor. In 

InNIitTiIaAtTIivVeE response Anathaym defends herself against the fusillade with her shield, forc- 
Initiative determines participants’ order of actions during the ing her to block three times, once per arrow. This costs all three of her Action 

cycles of a Combat Round. It is rolled at the start of a fight. Unless Points, so when her turn arrives she s unable to do anything and indeed cannot 
something occurs to change the situation, such as certain Combat actf or the rest of the round. 
Actions or Special Effects, initiative remains in play until it is forced The Games Master cycles back to the highest initiative, butf ortunately for 
to be re-rolled. Anathaym the centawrs each spend their second (and last) Action Point nocking 

new arrows to their bows. Thus the end of the second cycle s reached, and 
since nobody has any Action Points remaining, a new round s begun. 

90



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

attack with a weapon. Only one proactive action may be attempted 
per cycle. If no proactive action is selected, the character is assumed KEeEePpIinNgG TRraACckK oOFf ACcTtIioOnN POoIiNnTtSs 
to have used Dither by default. 1t can be tricky to keep track of Action Points during a round, espe- 

Reactive actions are those taken by a character to counter or ctally if characters make a habit of using Combat Actions such as Delay 

resist an act made against them. Only one reaction attempt is per- or casting spells which require more than one turn to complete. As an aide 

mitted for each threat, an example would be trying to parry an lo simplify book keeping, the use of tokens (coins or poker chips are ideal) 

attack. However, any number of reactions may be made per cycle, 15 recommended. 

provided that the character has Action Points to spend. Guve each player a number of tokens equal to their Action Points, 

The end of the cycle is reached once every participant has taken then each time they act or react, remove one of the tokens — tossing them 

their turn. If anyone still has Action Points remaining then a new into a used pile in the centre of the table. In the case of the Delay action, 

cycle is begun for those characters with Action Points available. This the token can be moved half way, indicating a held action which can be 

continues until all available Action Points have been expended, at triggered at a later point. For spell casting a separate pile could be formed 

which point the round is over, and a new one begins. which keeps track of how many turns have been invested thus far: 
When each round concludes the players can reclaim a requasite number 

of tokensfrom the discard pile. Of course other methods can be used, such 
COoMmBbAaTt ACcTtIioONnSs as using due as trackers or even tallying Action Points on scrap paper. 

Combat Actions are those acts which can be performed during N f 
battle. Drawing a weapon, casting a spell, or diving clear from an 
attack are all examples of Combat Actions. Most are concerned 

Change Range
with elements of combat itself, but some relate to activities outside HANGE ANGE 

the to and fro of spells and weapons. The character can attempt to close on, or retreat from, an oppo- 
nent; changing the range at which he is fighting to take best advan- 

As previously mentioned, how often a character can act per 
round is limited by their available Action Points. These are spent tage of his weapon’s reach or disengage from engagement entirely. 

over the course of each Combat Round to perform various Combat See Weapon Reach - Closing and Opening Range on page 106. 

Actions. Once a combatant’s Action Points are expended, they may 
DeeLlay 

no longer act for the remainder of that round, and must wait until 
The character conserves his action so that he can instead perform 

their points reset at the beginning of the next. 
a Reactive Action at a later time, such as an Interrupt or Parry. The 

Unless otherwise specified any Combat Action (save for ‘free’ 
Action Point cost of delaying is covered by whatever act is finally 

actions) costs one Action Point. Thus combatants need to care- 
performed. If the delayed action is not taken before the character’s 

fully consider how and when they use their points. They may act as 
next turn (on the following cycle), then the character is considered to 

aggressively or defensively as they wish, dynamically reacting to the 
have Dithered, and the Action Point is lost. 

evolving circumstance of the combat. 

DiiTthHEeRr 
PRrOoAaCcTtIiVvEe ACcTtIioONnSs 

A character can decide to simply waste his turn doing nothing 
The following are activities a character can attempt on his Turn 

useful. 
by spending an Action Point. Note that some actions such as spell 
casting or reloading may take several turns to complete; each turn 

Howlpd Maacgiic 
costing its own Action Point. Once casting is complete, the character may hold a spell, miracle 

or spirit in temporary check, awaiting the best moment to release it. 
ATtTtaAcCkK 

The magic may be held back for as long as the character continues 
The character can attempt to strike with a hand-to-hand weapon 

to take this action on his subsequent turns, but allows free use of the 
or use a ranged weapon. 

Counter Spell reaction if pertinent to his spell. 

BRrrRaAcCeE 
Moouunnt 

The character braces himself by taking a firm stance, and lean- 
The character can mount or dismount a riding beast. Particu- 

ing into the direction of a forthcoming attack. For the purposes 
larly large mounts may require several turns to complete. 

of resisting Knockback or Leaping Attacks the character’s SIZ is 
treated as 50% bigger. Against the Bash special effect SIZ is dou- 

Moovvee 
bled. The benefits of bracing are lost once the character moves away Provided he is not engaged with an opponent, the character can 
from the place they planted themselves. move any distance the Games Master deems suitable for the situa- 

ton. The Move Combat action is not required for every instance of 
CAasTt MAaGgIiCc 

movement during combat. 
The character can attempt to cast a spell, call for a miracle, 

One does not need to spend an Action Point on Move to engage 
invoke a talent or summon a spirit. Complex magics may require 

an opponent. For instance, a character crossing an open field to 
several turns in order to complete the casting. Once concluded, the 

engage a group of archers would spend 1 Action Point to cover the 
magic can be released at any moment up until the caster’s next turn; 

distance. He would not, though, need to spend a further Action 
at which point it can be held for later effect; but this requires the 

Point to initiate combat with one of the archers when he reaches 
Hold Magic action (see below) to maintain it in preparation for later 

their vantage point. He may use his next turn solely for his attack 
release. 

roll. 

91



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA StTrRuUGgGgLlEe 
Backtracking the centawrs’ trail, Anathaym and Zamothus discover the If the character is the victim of a certain types of attack or Spe- 

raider’s encampment in a small cave-filled canyon far to the west of Meeros. cial Effect, he may attempt to extract himself from the situation. For 

Using the cover of darkness they creep close enough to see a sorcerer by the example breaking free from a Grapple or Pin Weapon. 

name of Kratos, whom the herd is serving, about to perform a human sac- 
rifce of a youth tied spread-eagled between frighteningly carved totem poles. REeAaCcTtIiVvEe ACcTtIioONnSs 
Lamothis orders Anathaym to deal with the black wizard, then yells loudly This list specifies reactions which can be used at any time during 

and, bedecked in his bronze hoplite armows; heroically leaps down into the the Combat Round as a response to an imminent threat. As in the 

madst of the centaur warriwors to cause a distraction. previous list, a reaction costs an Action Point to perform. 

Anathaym runs to engage the sorcerer and Initiative 1s rolled, resulting in 
COoUuNnTtEeRr SPpEeLlLl 

Kratos gaining the higher Initiative. Spotting her approach the sorcerer imme- 
The character can attempt to dismiss or counter an incoming 

diately begins invoking a diabolical spell, one which the Games Master deter- 
spell, miracle or spirit. This assumes the countering magic has a 

manes will take two turns to cast. He marks off the fust of Kratos® Action 
casting time of one Turn, otherwise it must be prepared in advance, 

Points for the round. Guessing at her immanent doom, Anathaym on her turn 
and temporarily withheld using the Hold Magic action. Successfully 

tries to stab the sorcerer; forcing Kralos (who has no weapons) to Evade in a 
intercepting magic in this manner is assumed to negate the entire 

desperate attempt to avoud the blow. Rolls are made, and the sorcerer success- 
spell or miracle, even those with multiple targets or areas of effect. 

JSully throws kamself backwards into the shadows, but is now prone upon the 
rocky ground. T his concludes the cycle, with Anathaym having used one Action 

EVvaAdDEe 
Point, and Kratos two. 

The character can attempt to dive or roll clear of threats such as 
The next cycle begins with the sorcerer in apparent difficully. He has one 

incoming missiles or a charging attack. Using Evade leaves the char- 
Action Point remaining, and has the choice of either kicking at the warrior 

acter prone, unless mitigated by some special consequence. Thus 
in the hope of perhaps tripping her (leaving him at the mercy of Anathaym’s 

the character’s next turn is usually spent taking the Regain Footing 
sword_for the rest of the round) or continuing his half cast spell. Facing little 

action to stand again. See Evading on page 103. 
chance of mercy Kralos uses his turn to complete his spell and rolls against his 
Invocation skill. Despite an imposed difficultly grade of Formidablefor lying InNtTeErRrRuUPpTt 
on las back, he succeeds, and disappears in a puff of greasy, black smoke. (Delaying characters only) Halts an opponent’s turn after his decla- 
Anathaym 15 left on her turn with nobody to attack, so revises her intentions ration in order to take your own delayed turn. Assuming no change 
and starts cutting the youtl’s bonds... in the tactical situation, the opponent continues his turn after yours 

is completed. If unable to still achieve his original declaration, the 
opponent’s Action Point is wasted. An interrupt can also be used 

To summarise, use the Move Combat Action for: 
against anyone passing close by the delaying character, within 

& Moving up towards a combat weapon reach. 

& Perform a dramatic action within combat (swing from a 
handy chandelier, for example) DEeLlAaYy aAnNDd InNtTeErRrRuUPpTt 

Delay s intended to be a way of allowing a character to conserve 
Move s not necessary to engage an opponent. 

all of their Action Points in a Round jfor reactive actions; for example 
parrying 

OUuTtMmAaNnOoEeUuVvRrEe 
Interrupt, on the other hand, is intended to permit pre-emptive actions 

The character can engage multiple opponents in a group 
which could, but do not necessarily, involve combat, such as slamming a 

opposed roll of Evade skills. Those who fail to beat his roll cannot 
door shut, knocking a siege engine off target, waiting for the clear shot, 

attack him that Combat Round. See the section on Outmanoeu- 
and so on. 1t is also worded to allow characters to intercept those that try 

vring on page 104. 
to dodge or pass close by them. 

REeeaAdDyY Neither Delay nor Interrupt are intended to be used as a way of 
 WEeAaPpOoNn 

The character may draw, sheath, withdraw or reload a weapon. gaining an Action Point advantage over a closing opponent: it is not in the 

Retrieving a nearby dropped weapon requires two turns: one to spurit of the rules to permat the withholding of actions until engagement 

move and reach down for the weapon, and a second to return to has been initiated. 

a readied stance. Some missile weapons require several turns to - 4 
reload. 

REeGgAaIinN FoOOoTtIinNgG 
If unengaged with an opponent, the character can regain his PAaRrRrYy 

The character can attempt to defend against an incoming attack 
footing from being tripped or knocked down. If engaged, the char- 
acter must win an opposed test of Brawn or Athletics with the oppo- using a combination of parrying, blocking, leaning, ducking or 

nent before standing. side-stepping footwork to minimise the blow. 

FRrEeEe ACcTtIioONnSs 
Free actions can be performed at any time during the Combat 

Round, and cost no Action Points to perform. 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

ASsSsEeSsSs SIitTuUaAtTiIoOnN WAaRrDd LoOCcAaTtIioOnN 
If unengaged, a character can make a Perception roll at no The character guards a particular Hit Location from being hit by 

Action Point cost. Success in the roll alerts them to any relevant dedicating one of his weapons to statically cover the area. Any blow 
changes in the tactical situation (such a spotting a foe beginning a which lands on that location has its damage automatically down- 
charge). graded as per normal for a parrying weapon of its Size. The ward 

continues until the dedicated weapon is used to attack or actively 
Drrooprp WEeAaPpOoNn parry. Establishing a ward or changing the Hit Location covered 

Dropping a weapon is a I'ree Action. must be performed prior to an opponent rolling to attack the charac- 
ter. Due to their design, shields can cover multiple areas. For further 

SIigGnNaALl 
explanation see Passive Blocking, page 105. 

If unengaged, gesturing or signalling to one or more participants 
(as long as they can perceive the sign) is a Free Action. 

SpPeEaAkK WEeAaPpOoNn SIizZeE 
A character can speak at any time during combat, but what is 

said should be limited to short phrases which can be uttered in five aAnNDd REeAaCchH 
seconds or less; for example “Time to die!”, ‘Look out behind you!” Every weapon in MYTHRAS possesses a number of different attri- 
or ‘Damn you to hell”” butes from the damage it deals to how many hands are required to 

wield it. Two of these ratings, Size and Reach are important due 
Usse Luck PoIinNTt to their mechanical effect. Size is used to determine the weapon’s 

Using a Luck Point — to re-roll a particular result for example —is ability to impose and parry damage (see Damage Reduction in this 
a Free Action. 

93



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

chapter), whilst Reach can affect whether an opponent lies within 
range of being struck (see Weapon Reach - Closing and Opening How CoMmBbAaTt WOoRrKkSs 
Range on page 1006). Fighting in MYTHRAS is resolved in a blow by blow progression, 

Size categories are Small, Medium, Large, Huge, and Enormous. each attack or parry representing a single swing, cast or shot of a 
Reach categories are Touch, Short, Medium, Long, and Very Long. Some weapon. Any offensive action is permitted the chance to be resisted 
monsters and weapons further extend these categories beyond the by a reaction. Thus even if a character manages to strike an oppo- 
scope of human characters, as illustrated in the Creatures chapter. nent, the foe is permitted its own roll to see if it can parry the blow 

Both of these ratings are largely abstract in nature, simplified to before it lands. The same philosophy is used whether the attacks are 
help speed play. Size is a combination of a weapon’s mass, leverage missile weapons against targets diving for cover, or trying to break 
and stability. Reach is more a measure of its length and ability to free from the iron grasp of a giant octopus. 
hold a foe at bay due to how far it extends beyond the hilt or grip. 

The Equipment chapter provides default Size and Reach values 
ATtTtAaCcKkSs AanNDd PAaRrRrIiEeSs 

for common weapons, but the following guidelines are provided for 
Close combat is handled in the following step by step manner: 

those Games Masters wishing to design their own armaments. 
The unarmed attacks of creatures are assigned similar categories 

1. On his turn the attacker spends an Action Point, rolls 
according to their physical characteristics. See page 222. 

against his Combat Style and notes the result. 
WEeAaPpOoNn Sii1zzeE CAaTtEeGgOoRrIiEeSs 2. If desired, the defender spends an Action Point, rolls against 

Size Description his Combat Style and notes the result. 

Human unarmed combat, and light single handed weapons 3. The success level of the results are compared as per a Dif- 
Small . . 

less than a kilo in weight, such as a dagger ferential Roll. 

. Single handed weapons over a kilo in weight, a mace for 4. Any difference grants the combatant with the superior roll 
Medium i 

instance one or more Special Effects (see below). 
5. If the attacker achieved a success or critical, he may roll 

Long hafted thrusting weapons, two handed spears being a 
Large R . 

case in point weapon damage and apply their Damage Modifier (if any). 
If applicable, a Hit Location is determined for the blow. 

i Two handed slashing, chopping or bashing weapons, like 
uge 
g greatswords 6. If the defender achieved a success or critical, reduce any 

damage inflicted according to the comparative sizes of the 
Weapons used by very large creatures, for example a tree 

Enormous weapons involved. 
trunk used by a giant 

It should be noted that any Special Effects generated by the 
WEeAaPpOoNn REeAaCchH  CAaTtEeGgOoRrIiEeSs exchange are independent of whether or not damage is inflicted. It 
Reach Description is quite possible for a defender to gain the higher success level, yet 
Touch Human reach in unarmed combat, knuckledusters, spiked still suffer injury. 

kneepads, and so on 

Short Weapons less than half a metre long; such as a dagger or 
DAaMmAaGgEe REeDdUuCcTtIioOnN 

short sword If a defender succeeds in parrying, then he can reduce an attack- 
Medium Single handed swung weapons longer than half a metre, er’s damage, if any, according to the comparative Size of the weap- 

like a ball and chain ons used. 
Long Single handed thrusting weapons, or two handed swung 

& Parrying an attack with a weapon or shield of equal or greater 
weapons, a great axe for instance 

Size deflects all damage 
Very Long Two handed or mounted thrusting weapons, polearms or & Parrying with a weapon or shield of one Size less only deflects 

lances for example half damage 
& Parrying with a weapon or shield #wo or more Sizes less fails to 

deflect any damage 

For example, parrying a great axe (Huge) with a hoplite shield (also Huge) 

KEeEePpIinNgG TrRaACckK oOFf ATtTtaAcCkK RooLlLls would block all damage; parrying it with a pike (Large) would halve the damage, 

As will be_further explained in the rules, some Special Effects and and parrying it with a shortsword (Medium) would stop no damage at all. 

certain types of injury require an opposed roll of some sort against the 
attacker’s original attack roll. The same thing applies to offensive magic. PAaRrRrYyIinNgG aA MIiSsSsEedD ATtTtaAcCkK 
For this reason it s a useful habitfor players to leave the percentage dice 

If the attacker misses his initial attack roll, the defender has 
lying untouched on the table until the attack and consequences have been 

the option of whether or not to spend an Action Point to parry. 
Sully resolved. In this way the dice provide a record of what number was 

Although it may seem disingenuous to parry an attack which will 
actually rolled, thus helping to avoid lapses of memory or unnecessary 

miss anyway, a skilled defender can use this to his advantage to gain 
dispute. 

one or more Special Effects, potentially weakening or incapacitating 

N 4 a foe, and preserving their next turn for some other action. 

94



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

DAaMmAaGgEe REeDdUuCcTtIioOnN TAaBbLlEe 

Attacking Weapon 

Small Medium Large Huge Enormous 

Small All Half None None None 

Medium All All Half None None 

Defending Weapon Large All All All Half None 

Huge All All All All Half 

Enormous All All All All All 

opponent fumbles, then he misses the opportunity to take advantage 
UNnAaBbLlEe oORr UNnWwILilLlIinNgG tToO PAaRrRrYy 

of his foe’s clumsiness. 
In a situation where a defender is unable to parry due to having 

In the rare circumstance that both opponents fumble, Games 
no Action Points remaining, or, confident in his ability to weather 

Masters are encouraged to describe some hilarious or amazingly 
the blow, elects not to parry, he is treated as having automatically 

improbable event occurring which temporarily takes both out of the 
rolled a failure. This has the consequence of granting a successful 

fight. 
attacker one or more Special Effects. 

FaAIilLeEdD ROoLlLls aAnNDd FuUMmBbLlEeSs 
If both combatants fail their rolls, or the defender decides not to SPpEeCcIiaALl EFfFfEeCcTtSs 

take advantage of a missed attack, then the attack-parry sequence Fighting is far more than simply injuring or killing an opponent. 

ends, and combat continues on to the participant with the next high- Combative arts teach many methods of defeating a foe, perhaps 

est Initiative. rendering them helpless or forcing them into situations where they 

Fumbling a Combat Style roll has no additional effect other than must capitulate, without necessarily needing to actually cause them 

the chance it provides his opponent to inflict multiple (and more harm. Special Effects represent these techniques, and control how 

dire) Special Effects against him. If a combatant fails when his they occur in play. 
Whenever opponents engage in a Differential Roll of their 

respective fighting skills (Combat Styles or Evade for example), 
any resulting difference in success levels indicates an opportunity 

REeTtRrOoAaCcTtIiVvEe PAaRrRrYyIinNgG WIiTthH for Special Effects to occur. This reflects one combatant manoeu- 

Aa SKkIiLllL oOVvEerR 100% vring his opponent into a disadvantageous situation which can be 
exploited using a cunning trick or tactic. 

Allowing a character to parry only those attacks which will bt is an 
The number of Special Effects received depends on the differ- 

essential part of maintaining the unpredictable flow of combat. However 
ence between the levels of success, as illustrated on the Differential 

it does start to cause problems when the defender has a combat skill exceed- 
Roll Results Table (see page 51). 

ing 100 %, since what was originally a successful roll by the attacker may 
If any Special Effects are won during an exchange, they must 

become downgraded to a muss if the penalty provided by the defender’s 
be selected before Damage and Hit Location, if any, are rolled. In 

superior skill us retroactively applied. 
cases where the recipient is badly wounded in addition to receiving 

To avoid messy calculations or causalily issues, the best way to handle 
a Special Effect, Endurance rolls are resolved after the application 

this situation s to only permut the defender to impose his over 100% skill 
of the effect. 

penally if he pro-actively defends, declaring his parry before the attacker 
Special Effects cover a diverse range of situations and techniques. 

r0lls. Thas has the added benefit of preventing superhumanly skilled oppo- 
Some are designed specifically for attacks, whilst others are intended 

nents_from being near-immune lo atlacks without the need to expend Action 
for defence, and a few are adaptable for either circumstance. Certain 

Points to defend themselves. 
Special Effects can also be limited to particular weapon types or 
specific dice rolls, requiring a Critical or Fumble result on their skill 

For example; despite hus best efforts to outmanoewvre them, Master 
check for instance. 

Lamothis s surrounded by centaur opponents. The grizzled warrior is 
When two or more Special Effects are gained, the combatant 

worthy of his title, possessing (amongst others) a Combat Style (Meerish 
may freely mix and match which ones are selected, providing he 

Infantry) skill of 120%. However he is surrounded andf aces the tough 
meets the prerequisite conditions for each one. Some effects can be 

chotce of whether or not to use his remaining two Action Points to defend 
stacked. For example, an attacker who rolls a critical success and 

fumself- Since hus skill s so high that it would provide a penally to his 
wins two Special Effects could choose Maximise Damage twice, 

attackers, the Games Master asks lus player of he wishes to declare his 
rather than choosing two separate offensive manoeuvres. 

parry i advance (thus reducing the centawrs impending attack skill by 
20%) or withhold parrying until i is seen whether the centawrs hut or 
miss at their normal skill. 
N - 

95



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

Tatigue, until they collapse and possibly die. Bleeding wounds can 
be staunched by passing a First Aid skill roll, but the recipient can no 
longer perform any strenuous or violent action without re-opening 
the wound. See Blood Loss page 71. 

BluinDd OPpPpOoNnEeNnTt 
On a critical the defender briefly blinds his opponent by throw- 

ing sand, reflecting sunlight off his shield, or some other tactic which 
briefly interferes with the attacker’s vision. The attacker must make 
an opposed roll of his Evade skill (or Weapon style if using a shield) 
against the defender’s original parry roll. If the attacker fails he suf- 
fers the Blindness situational modifier for the next 1d3 turns. 

ByPpAasss ARrmMOoUuRr 
On a critical the attacker finds a gap in the defender’s natural or 

worn armour. If the defender is wearing armour above natural pro- 
tection, then the attacker must decide which of the two is bypassed. 
This effect can be stacked to bypass both. For the purposes of this 
effect, physical protection gained from magic is considered as being 
worn armour. 

CHhOoOoSsEe LoOCcAaTtIioOnN 
When using hand-to-hand melee weapons the attacker may freely 

select the location where the blow lands, as long as that location is 
normally within reach. If using ranged weapons Choose Location is 
a Critical Success only, unless the target is within close range, and is 
either stationary or unaware of the attacker. 

THhEe HEeAaDd?? AGgAaIiNn? 
SPpEeCcIiaALl EFfFfeEcCTt DEeSsCcRrIiPpTtIioOnNSs Some Games Masters may find the Choose Location special effect a 

rather sour annoyance, especially if their players continue to take downf oe 

ACcCcIiDdEeNnTtAaLl InNjJuUrRyY afler foe with exactly the same blow. What might surprise many people 

The defender deflects or twists an opponent’s attack in such a lo know 1s that this behaviour s exactly matched by real life combat. Not 
way that he fumbles, injuring himself. The attacker must roll dam- only is the head s the closest part of the body to strike, but shields tend to 
age against himself in a random hit location using the weapon used be held beneath the level of the eyes, exposing the head and part of theface 

to strike. If unarmed he tears or breaks something internal, the 50 thatyou can see your opponent. 

damage roll ignoring any armour. T here are several techniques which can help prevent foes being chopped 
down with the same blow. Furst, and most obvious, s to wear a hel- 

ARrIiSsEe met, which after shields was the most prevalent type of protection used 
Allows the defender to use a momentary opening to roll back up throughout hastory. Secondly s to use the Ward Location action. This is a 

to their feet. Dperfectly natural thing to do, since once an opponent has suffered a wound 
he will tend to try to keep that weakened area covered so that it cannot be 

BAashH struck again. 
The attacker deliberately bashes the opponent oft balance. How Last but by no means least the Games Master should hamself use 

far the defender totters back or sideward depends on the weapon a range of dwerse and interesting Special Ejffects, showing that Choose 
being used. Shields knock an opponent back one metre per for Locatwon can be eclipsed by manoeuvres such as Bleed, Stun Location or 
every two points of damage rolled (prior to any subtractions due to even Bash in the right circumstances! 
armour, parries, and so forth), whereas bludgeoning weapons knock 
back one metre per for every three points. Bashing works only on . 4 
creatures up to twice the attacker’s SIZ. If the recipient is forced 
backwards into an obstacle, then they must make a Hard Athletics 

CIirRcCuUmMVvEenNTt COoVvEeRr 
or Acrobatics skill roll to avoid falling or tripping over. 

Assuming that the shooter is using some high-tech weaponry, 
they can fire around the target’s cover. In most cases this will require 

BLlEeeEdD 
The attacker can attempt to cut open a major blood vessel. If the something along the lines of self guided ammunition. If used as a 

blow overcomes Armour Points and injures the target, the defender trick shot, for example bouncing a laser blast off a mirror or rico- 
cheting a bullet off a wall, then the special effect should be treated as 

must make an opposed roll of Endurance against the original attack 
a Ciritical Success only with a commensurate reduction in damage. 

roll. If the defender fails, then they begin to bleed profusely. At 
the start of each Combat Round the recipient loses one level of 

96



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

CIirRcCuUmMVvEenNTt PAaRrRrYy EnNHhAaNnCcEe PAaRrRrYy 
On a critical the attacker may completely bypass an otherwise On a critical the defender manages to deflect the entire force of 

successful parry. an attack, no matter the Size of his weapon. 

CLlosse RAaNnGgEe ENnTtaANnGgLlEe 
Permits the character to automatically change the engagement Allows a character wielding an entangling weapon, such as a 

range between himself and his opponent, so that they end up at the whip or net, to immobilise the location struck. An entangled arm 
Range favoured by the shorter weapon (see Weapon Reach - Closing cannot use whatever it is holding; a snared leg prevents the target 
and Opening Range page 106). from moving; whilst an enmeshed head, chest or abdomen makes 

all skill rolls one grade harder. On his following turn the wielder 
COoMmPpEeLl SuURrRrEenNDdEeRr may spend an Action Point to make an automatic Irip Opponent 

Allows the character a chance to force the surrender of a help- attempt. An entangled victim can attempt to free himself on his turn 
less or disadvantaged opponent; for example someone who has been by either attempting an opposed roll using Brawn to yank free, or 
disarmed, is lying prone unable to regain his footing, has suffered a win a Special Effect and select Damage Weapon, Disarm Opponent 
serious (or worse) wound, and so on. Damage is not inflicted on the or Slip Free. 
target, they are only threatened. Assuming the target is sapient and 
able to understand the demand, the target must make an opposed FlLuURrRrYy 
roll of Willpower against the original attack or parry roll. If the tar- An unarmed creature or attacker can make an immediate fol- 
get fails, they capitulate. Games Masters may wish to reserve Com- low-up attack using a different limb or body part, without needing 
pel Surrender for use against non-player characters only. to wait for its next turn. A human attacker might follow up a punch 

to the abdomen with a knee to the face for example. The additional 
DAaMmAaGgEe WEeAaPpOoNn attack still costs an Action Point, but potentially allows several attacks 

Permits the character to damage his opponent’s weapon as part in sequence before the defender can respond offensively. 
of an attack or parry. If attacking, the character aims specifically at 
the defender’s parrying weapon and applies his damage roll to it, FoORrCcEe FaAIilLuUrREe 
rather than the wielder. The targeted weapon uses its own Armour Used when an opponent fumbles, the character can com- 
Points for resisting the damage. If reduced to zero Hit Points the bine Force Failure with any other Special Effect which requires 
weapon breaks. an opposed roll to work. Force Failure causes the opponent to fail 

his resistance roll by default — thereby automatically be disarmed, 
DiisarrRmM OPpPpOoNnEeNnTt tripped, etc. 

The character knocks, yanks or twists the opponent’s weapon 
out of his hand. The opponent must make an opposed roll of his Grriip 
Combat Style against the character’s original roll. If the recipient of Provided the opponent is within the attacker’s Unarmed Com- 
the disarm loses, his weapon is flung a distance equal to the roll of bat reach, he may use an empty hand (or similar limb capable of 
the disarmer’s Damage Modifier in metres. If there is no Damage gripping such as claws, tails or tentacles) to hold onto the opponent, 
Modifier then the weapon drops at the disarmed person’s feet. The preventing them from being able to change weapon range or disen- 
comparative size of the weapons affects the roll. Each step that the gage from combat. The opponent may attempt to break free on his 
disarming character’s weapon is larger increases the difficulty of the turn, requiring an opposed roll of either Brawn or Unarmed against 
opponent’s roll by one grade. Conversely each step the disarming whichever of the two skills the gripper prefers. If the gripped vic- 
character’s weapon is smaller, makes the difficulty one grade eas- tim wins, they manage to break free. Note that some attackers using 
ier. Disarming works only on creatures of up to twice the attacker’s Brawn may be so strong that no amount of brute force or cunning 
STR. technique can overcome their grip (see Brawn page 39). 

Drorp Foe ImMPpAaLlEe 
Assuming the target suffers at least a minor wound from the shot, The attacker can attempt to drive an impaling weapon deep into 

they are forced to make an Opposed Test of their Endurance against the defender. Roll weapon damage twice, with the attacker choosing 
the attacker’s hit roll. Failure indicates that the target succumbs to which of the two results to use for the attack. If armour is penetrated 
shock and pain, becoming incapacitated and unable to continue and causes a wound, then the attacker has the option of leaving the 
fighting. Recovery from incapacitation can be performed with a weapon in the wound, or yanking it free on their next turn. Leaving 
successful First Aid check or using some form of technological or the weapon in the wound inflicts a difficulty grade on the victim’s 
narcotic booster if such exists in the campaign. Otherwise the tem- future skill attempts. The severity of the penalty depends on the size 
porary incapacitation lasts for a period equal to one hour divided by of both the creature and the weapon impaling it, as listed on the 
the Healing Rate of the target. Impale Effects Table above. For simplicity’s sake, further impale- 

ments with the same sized weapon inflict no additional penalties. 
Duck BAack To withdraw an impaled weapon during melee requires use of the 

This special effect allows the shooter to immediately duck back Ready Weapon combat action. The wielder must pass an unopposed 
into cover, without needing to wait for their next Turn to use the Brawn roll (or win an opposed Brawn roll if the opponent resists). 
Take Cover action. The character must be already standing or Success pulls the weapon free, causing further injury to the same 
crouching adjacent to some form of cover to use Duck Back. location equal to half the normal damage roll for that weapon, 

97



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

ImMPpAaLlEe EFfFfEeCcTtSs TAaBbLlEe 
Creature SIZ Small Weapons Medium Weapons Large Weapons Huge Weapons Enormous Weapons 

1-10 Tormidable Herculean Incapacitated Incapacitated Incapacitated 

11-20 Hard Tormidable Herculean Incapacitated Incapacitated 

21-30 No Effect Hard Tormidable Herculean Incapacitated 

31-40 No Effect No Effect Hard Formidable Herculean 

41-50 No Effect No Effect No Effect Hard Tormidable 

Each +10 Tollow table progression 

but without any damage modifier. Failure implies that the weapon through the first victim to strike a second behind them, assuming 
remained stuck in the wound with no further effect, although the that it overcomes the first target’s body armour. The second vic- 
wielder may try again on their next turn. Specifically barbed weap- tim however, only suffers half damage due to attenuation or slowing 
ons (such as harpoons) inflict normal damage. Armour does not down of the shot. Overpenetration is generally of more use with 
reduce withdrawal damage. Whilst it remains impaled, the attacker high powered weapons that inflict large amounts of damage or those 
cannot use his impaling weapon for parrying. which have some sort of armour piercing ability. Any special effects 

inflicted on the first target are not applied to the second. 
KIiLlLl SIilLeEnNTtLlyY 

Restricted to those trained in a Combat Style with the Assassina- PinN DoowwnnN 
tion benefit. It allows the attacker to neutralise a victim in complete Similar to Press Advantage, this special effect forces the target to 
silence, covering their mouth or grasping them about the neck whilst make an Opposed Test of their Willpower against the attacker’s hit 
simultaneously stabbing, cutting or garrotting them. This prevents roll. Failure means that the target hunkers down behind whatever 
the victim from crying out or otherwise raising an alarm for the cover is available, and cannot return fire on their next Turn. Note 
entire round. In addition, if during this time the attacks inflict a Seri- that Pin Down works even if no actual damage is inflicted on the tar- 
ous or Major Wound, the victim will automatically fail its Endur- get (perhaps due to a successful evasion or shots striking their cover 
ance roll. Kill Silently can only be used on a surprised opponent, instead), as it relies on the intimidation effect of projectiles passing 
and only on the first attack against them. very close by. 

Although a pinned victim is unable to fire back for the requi- 
MAaRrKkSsmMAaNn site time, they can perform other actions provided they don’t expose 

Permits the shooter to move the Hit Location struck by his shot themselves to fire in the process, such as crawling away to new cover, 
by one step, to an immediately adjoining body area. Physiology has communicating with others, reloading a weapon, and so on. 
an effect on what can be re-targeted, and common sense should be 
applied. Thus using this special effect on a humanoid would permit PiNn WEeAaPpOoNn 
an attacker who rolled a leg shot, to move it up to the abdomen On a critical the character can pin one of his opponent’s weap- 
instead. Conversely shooting a griffin in the chest would permit ons or shield, using his body or positioning to hold it in place. On his 
selection of the forelegs, wings or head. turn the opponent may attempt to wrestle or manoeuvre the pinned 

item free. This costs an Action Point and works as per the Grip spe- 
Maaxxiimmiisse DAaMmAaGgEe cial effect. Failure means that the pinned item remains unusable. In 

On a critical the character may substitute one of his weapon’s the meantime, an opponent lacking a weapon or shield in the other 
damage dice for its full value. For example a Hatchet which nor- hand may only avoid an attack by evading, using his Unarmed skill 
mally does 1d6 damage would instead be treated as a 6, whereas a or disengaging completely. 
great club with 2d6 damage would instead inflict 1d6+6 damage. 
This special effect may be stacked. Although it can also be used for PRrEePpaARrEe COoUuNnTtEeRr 
natural weapons, Maximise Damage does not affect the Damage The defender reads the patterns of his foe and pre-plans a 
Modifier of the attacker, which must be rolled normally. counter against a specific Special Effect (which should be noted 

down in secret). If his opponent attempts to inflict the chosen Spe- 
OPpEeNn RAaNnGgEe cial Effect upon him during the fight, the defender instantly substi- 

Permits the character to automatically change the engagement tutes the attackers effect with an offensive or defensive one of his 
range between himself and his opponent, so that they end up at the own, which succeeds automatically. 
Range favoured by the longer weapon (see (sce Weapon Reach - 
Closing and Opening Range page 106). PRrEeSsSs ADdVvAaNnTtAaGgEe 

The attacker pressures his opponent, so that his foe is forced to 
OVvEeRrEeXxTteEnNdD OPpPpOoNnEeNnTt remain on the defensive, and cannot attack on their next turn. This 

The defender sidesteps or retreats at an inconvenient moment, allows the attacker to potentially establish an unbroken sequence 
causing the attacker to overreach himself. Opponent cannot attack of attacks whilst the defender desperately blocks. It is only effective 
on his next turn. This special effect can be stacked. against foes concerned with defending themselves. 

OVvEeRrPpEeNnEeTtRrAaTtIioOnN 
If shooting at lineally positioned opponents or into a densely 

packed group, this special effect allows the shot to travel completely 

98



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

RAaPpIidD REeLloOaAdD Sulpipr FRree 
When using a ranged weapon, the attacker reduces the reload On a critical the defender can automatically escape being Entan- 

time for the next shot by one. This effect can be stacked. gled, Gripped, or Pinned. 

REeMmIiSsEe StTaAnNdD Fast 
The attacker performs a sequential follow-up attack with a The defender braces himself against the force of an attack, allow- 

weapon of size Small on his opponent’s next turn, which forces the ing them to avoid the Knockback effects of any damage received. 
foe to change their proactive action into a reactive one. 

StTuUnN LocAaTtioOnN 
ScaAr FoEe The attacker can use a bludgeoning weapon to temporarily 

The opponent is given a scar that will disfigure them for the stun the body part struck. If the blow overcomes Armour Points 
rest of their life, for example a slice across the face, or an artfully and injures the target, the defender must make an opposed roll of 
inscribed letter across the chest. Endurance vs. the original attack roll. If the defender fails, then the 

Hit Location is incapacitated for a number of turns equal to the 
SEeLleEcCtT TaARrGgEeTt damage inflicted. A blow to the torso causes the defender to stagger 

When an attacker fumbles, the defender may manoecuvre or winded, only able to defend. A head shot renders the foe briefly 
deflect the blow in such a way that it hits an adjacent bystander insensible. 
instead. This requires that the new target is within reach of the 
attacker’s close combat weapon, or in the case of a ranged attack, is SuUNnDdEeRr 
standing along the line of fire. The new victim is taken completely The attacker may use a suitable weapon to damage the armour 
by surprise by the unexpected accident, and has no chance to avoid or natural protection of an opponent. Any weapon damage, after 
the attack which automatically hits. In compensation however, they reductions for parrying or magic, is applied against the Armour Point 
suffer no special effect. value of the protection. Surplus damage in excess of its Armour 

Points is then used to reduce the AP value of that armour(ed) loca- 
tion — ripping straps, bursting rings, creasing plates or tearing away 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

SPpEeCcIiaALl EFfFfEeCcTtSs SuUmMMmAaRrYy 
Special Effect Offensive Defensive Specific Weapon Type Specific Roll Stackable 

Accidental Injury X Attacker Fumbles 

Arise X 

Bash X Shields or Bludgeoning 
Bleed Cutting Weapons 

Blind Opponent X Defender Criticals 
Bypass Armour Attacker Criticals X 

Choose Location See Description 

Circumvent Cover Ranged Weapons 

Circumvent Parry Attacker Criticals 

Close Range 

Compel Surrender 

Damage Weapon 

Disarm Opponent 

Drop Foe Ranged Weapons 

Duck Back Ranged Weapons 

Enhance Parry X Defender Ciriticals 

Entangle X Entangling Weapons 

Flurry Unarmed X 

Force Failure X Opponent Fumbles 

Grip Unarmed 

Impale Impaling Weapons 

Kill Silently Small Weapons See Description 

Marksman Ranged Weapons 

Maximise Damage Attacker Criticals X 

Open Range X 

Overextend Opponent X X 

Overpenetration Ranged Weapons Critical Only 

Pin Down X Ranged Weapons X 

Pin Weapon Critical Only 

Prepare Counter X X 

Press Advantage 

Rapid Reload 

Remise Small Weapon Only 

Scar Foe 

Select Target Attacker Fumbles 

Slip Free Defender Criticals 

Stand Fast 

Stun Location Bludgeoning Weapons 

Sunder Axes, Two Handed Weapons 

Take Weapon Unarmed 

Trip Opponent 

Weapon Malfunction Ranged Weapons Attacker Fumbles 

Withdraw X 

100

A KA A A KA < < A A M A S A RB A I  < 

A A KA < A KA 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
One of the centawrs battling Master Zamothis becomes infuriated at the CLlosse COoMmBbAaTt 

grizzled warrior’s near impenetrable defence. When 1t finally rolls a critical Close combat is hand to hand fighting in its classic sense, when 

attack, Zamothis once again parries with his Hoplite shield which would nor- combatants strike each other with wielded or natural weapons. 

mally be enough to block any damage from the centaur’s great club. So rather Although the basic combat rules have been described previously, 

than attacking the warrior;, the enraged beast aims for the shield instead, and this section further details a number of tactical and environmental 

selects Damage Weapon as its effect. The blowfrom the club inflicts 11 points situations which may affect those in close combat. 

of damage which when applied to the shield, overcomes its 6 Armour Points The following guidelines offer ways to make close combat more 

and reduces it to 10 Hit Points. The resulting cracking noise alerts Master interesting and help to further explain some concepts hinted at ear- 

Lamothis, who realises he will soon be in serwous trouble.. lier in this chapter. 

Meanwhile, Anathaym culs theyouth fiee, but as he flees to the entrance 
of the canyon, one of the centaurs spots the escape and closes in for an attack, SIitTuUaAtTiIoOnNaALl MOoDIdFifIiEeRrSs 
waving a dangerous looking halberd in wide circles above its head. Anathaym The Situational Modifiers table (see overleaf) provides some 
inderposes herself; and engages the savage warrior in combat. Rolls are made common situational modifiers that may be applied when fighting in 
resulting in Anathaym gaining a normal success, and the centaurfumbling! particular situations, or as the result of a Special Effect. 

With two special effects to select, Anathaym decides she doesn’t want to be Unless stated otherwise, these modifiers are applied to attacking, 
it by the halberd so chooses Disarm Opponent and Force Failure. Normally parrying, and evading equally. The difficulty grade column sug- 
this would prove troublesome for the heroine, her shortsword suffering signifi- gests a suitable skill penalty for that situation. Where two or more 
cant penalties to knock the larger weapon out of the centaur’s hands. However, situations are pertinent to the character, use the most severe. See 
because she has also taken Force Failure, the centaur automatically fails the Modifying Skills page 38. 
opposed roll and his weapon clatters to the ground, leaving fam unarmed. 

CLloosesEe COoMmBbAaTt SIitTuUaAtTiIoOnNaALl MOoDIdFifIiEeRrSs 

the hide, scales or chitin of monsters. If any damage remains after Situation Difficulty Grade 

the protection has been reduced to zero AP, it carries over onto the Attacking a helpless target Automatic 

Hit Points of the location struck. 
Attacking in a confined situation Hard 

TaAKkEe WEeAaPpOoNn Defending while on lower ground or against mounted 
Hard 

foe 
Allows an unarmed character to yank or twist an opponent’s 

weapon out of his hand. The opponent must make an opposed roll Tighting while on unstable ground Hard 

of his Combat Style against the character’s original Unarmed roll. Tighting whilst crouching or from one knee Hard 

If the target loses, his weapon is taken and from that moment on, Tighting in poor visibility (thick fog, snowstorm) Hard 

may be used by the character instead. Take Weapon differs from Defending against an attack from behind Tormidable 

Disarm Opponent in that the size of the weapon is largely irrele- Tighting while prone Tormidable 

vant. However, the technique only works on creatures of up to twice Tighting in partial darkness (dim illumination) Tormidable 
the attacker’s STR 

Tighting in pitch black conditions (no illumination at 
Herculean 

all) 
TriiPp OPpPpOoNnEeNnTt 

Blinded or loss of primary perceptive sense Herculean 
The character attempts to overbalance or throw his opponent to 

the ground. The opponent must make an opposed roll of his Brawn, 
Evade or Acrobatics against the character’s original roll. If the target 
fails, he falls prone. Quadruped opponents (or creatures with even EnNGgAaGgEemMEeNnTt 
more legs) may substitute their Athletics skill for Evade, and treat the An important concept of close combat is that of Engagement. A 

roll as one difficulty grade easier. character is considered Engaged if he is within melee weapon range 
of his opponent. This does not necessarily require that both combat- 

WEeAaPpOoNn MAaLlFfUuNnCcTtIioOnN (FFiIrReEaArRmMSs)) ants can reach each other; only that one of them can be potentially 
The attacker’s weapon malfunctions in such a way that it is ren- struck by the other. 

dered useless until time can be spent repairing it. Once a character has engaged with an opponent he can no 
longer freely depart that fight (Charging is a special exception). It 

WIiTthHdDrRaAwW requires some form of deliberate act to break contact with the foe, 
The defender may automatically withdraw out of reach, break- who might not wish to allow him to depart. This is normally per- 

ing off engagement with that particular opponent. formed via a combat action such as Change Range or Outmanoeu- 
vre, but sometimes an unexpected chance to disengage occurs by use 
of a Special Effect. Fleeing from a battle requires that engagement 
is broken first. 

Certain circumstances will allow a character to engage with mul- 
tiple foes simultaneously, provided the enemy are in close proximity 
with each other. This can occur in many ways, for instance closing 
with a line of soldiers blocking a bridge, or jumping down into the 

101



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

middle of a tight packed rabble. In such situations not only does the ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
character have the option of which foe he strikes, but the reverse is Although disarmed the centaur v still dangerous. On its next turn it clips 
also true. Anathaym with a hoof sending her reeling backwards, momentarily stunned. 

Withdrawing from Engagement in this circumstance depends on When she gathers her senses she sees that herfoe has galloped off to pluck up 
the distribution of foes. Obviously retreating from the middle of a a lance, and is now galloping back towards her; weapon levelledfor a charge! 
pack will be near impossible, whilst withdrawing from an organised Cursing that she only brought her peltast shield, Anathaym realises that 
formation might be automatic, providing the enemy doesn’t wish to attempting to parry the lance would resull in the weapon passing right through 
break ranks. the shield (shield size Large versus a lance size Huge, but boosted to size 

Enormous during a charge). Not wishing to be impaled she decides to try and 

CLlosse COoMmBbAaTt MEeCcHhAaNnIiCcSs dwe clear. The centaur makes an opposed roll of his weapon skill against 

The remainder of this section provides further guidelines con- Anathaym’s Evade. Both achieve normal successes but Anathaym gets the 

cerning combat under different tactical circumstances. agher 1ol and leaps clear;, ending up prone. On her next turn she regains her 
Jeet, but by this time the centaur has been carried clear by the speed of us 

CHhAaRrGgIinNGg attack, and is now slowing in preparationfor another charge... 
Charging is the act of moving quickly to increase the force and Fearing that she will eventually fail if forced to keep on evading, Ana- 

impact of an attack. There are two main types of charging, depend- thaym looks aroundf rantically for some other option, and spols the halberd she 
ing on whether the attacker wishes to stop in engagement range with earlier knocked from the centaur’s grasp. She quickly grabs the weapon and, 
the target or continue sweeping past, through or over the target. using 1t like a speas; sets it to receive charge then braces herself; completing her 

The common principles of a charge are as follows: arrangements just before the centaur contacts her again. 
Since both weapons are of equal reach, the Games Master declares that 

& A charge requires at least one full Combat Round of move- 
the attacks are simultaneous. The centaur’s attack s rolledf ust, and to Ana- 

ment at running or sprinting speed prior to contact 
thaym’s great relief the mighty beast just misses her with is lance, thanks to 

& A charge imposes a penalty to the attack roll, increasing it by 
the attack difficulty being raised to Hard. Her own attack us a hit however, 

one difficulty grade 
and since the halberd is set she uses the centaur’s own Damage Modifier 

& A charge increases a bipedal attacker’s Damage Modifier by against uself; in this case 1d8 (1d4 increased by two steps for the charge). 
one step; or the Damage Modifier of four (or more) legged T s added to the 1d8+2 for the halberd, and the special effectfor not defend- 
creatures by two steps. In addition, the Size of the attacking 

ing, Anathaym impales the weapon through the centaur’s chestfor 14 points 
weapon is improved by one step of damage, giving it a Major Wound. T he centaur collapses in gouts of blood, 

The recipient of a charge has three options; attempt to parry, unable to continue the fight. 

evade or simultaneously counterattack the charging attacker. 
Parrying a charge attack holds some significant risks, depend- great-axe, throwing himself at a shield wall, hoping that the impetus 

ing on the size and strength of the attacker. The primary danger is of his charge will help him smash through the defender’s shield or 
suffering knockback, which may leave a victim prone even if they knock him over. 
suffer no other damage from the impact. Use of the Brace combat Once the charge strikes home, the attacker is considered engaged 
action in advance of the charge attack can help mitigate the effects with his opponent. From that moment on combat proceeds normally. 
of knockback. The secondary threat comes from the bonus to the All benefits gained from the charge are lost after the first attack. 
charger’s weapon size, which may permit a blow to penetrate or 
overcome the defender’s parrying weapon. CHhAaRrGgIinNGg tThHrRoOuUgGhH COoNnTtAaCcTt 

Evading a charge attack is more of a gamble, but in some cir- The second type of charge is one which uses the momentum to 
cumstances may be the only option. The defender must make an carry the attacker through, and clear of an engagement. It is nor- 
opposed roll of his Evade skill versus the charging opponent’s com- mally limited to mounted combatants or creatures of significant size 
bat skill. If the defender wins he throws himself completely clear of unlikely to be hindered by an impact with smaller foes. For instance 
the charge, otherwise he is hit. Any difference in Level of Success an enraged aurochs could quite easily charge through a group of 
results in Special Effects as normal. warriors, tossing or trampling over a victim as it passes, before con- 

Counterattacking sacrifices the defender’s opportunity to actively tinuing on out of close combat range. 

defend against the charge in exchange for a chance to injure the The speed of such charges prevents the attacker and defender 
attacker. In such cases both sides are treated as having failed to parry, from exchanging more than a single action with each other, namely 
although they can still benefit from Passive Blocking. The wielder of the charge attack, and the defender’s reaction to it (Parry, Evade 
the weapon with the longest Reach strikes first, potentially hindering or Counterattack). Since the charge attack occurs on the attack- 
his opponent from launching the subsequent blow. If using long- er’s turn, they will have already been carried clear by the time the 
shafted impaling weapons which can be ‘set’ against a charge, the defender’s turn arrives. 
defender may substitute his own Damage Modifier for that of the Note that charges are not limited to just running, but can be per- 
charging opponent (or its mount if the attacker is riding). formed by flying or swimming creatures in the relevant environment. 

CHhAaRrGgIinNgG iInNtToO COoNnTtAaCcTt COoVvEeRr 
Some charges are intended as a method to crash into an oppo- Cover is used by opponents to obstruct attacks against them, 

nent, then remain in place to take advantage of any chaos caused. whether from ranged or close combat. This occurs by either phys- 

An example of this would be a barbarian warrior, armed with a ically blocking a blow due to the toughness of the interposing 

102



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

material, or by obscuring where precisely the foe is. For example a 
Evading Creatures

guard standing behind a crenellated wall may have his lower body VADING REATURES 
Creatures that lack thick natural armour to bull through attacks, or 

shielded, whereas a thief hiding somewhere behind a curtain may 
the intellect or skill to actively parry them, are oflenforced to evade in close 

be hidden from direct attack. The precise value of cover depends on 
combat in order lo defend themselves. 

the thickness of its protection and the extent of its coverage. 
1In these circumstances, most creatures lacking humanoidf orm, quad- 

In the case of partial cover, any attack against a target which 
rupeds or serpents_for example, have an inherent advantage over bipedal 

lands on an obscured Hit Location will be blocked to the extent 
characters; in that they rarely go prone when evading, due to their shape 

of the cover’s inherent protection. Thus in the case of the guard 
or multiple limbs. 

covered by the crenellated wall, any attack which would normally 
As a rule of thumb, whenever such a creature attempls lo evade an 

hit his abdomen or legs would be stopped by the stone fortification. 
attack, they only end up prone if they fail their Evade roll (the skill check, 

The effects of cover can be partially negated either by use of the 
not the opposed test). 

Choose Location special effect to aim at visible parts of the target; 
or striking through the cover if the weapon is capable of penetrating . 4 
it. When using ranged weapons however, Choose Location normally 
requires a critical success, which makes taking cover against missiles prone character from regaining their feet. Nothing prevents a prone 

extremely worthwhile. character from attempting to evade subsequent attacks, with the 

In situations where cover is total but the attacker knows his attack proviso that they suffer a ‘Fighting while prone’ situational penalty 

will penetrate, he may strike blindly at the hidden target. In such as they continue to roll aside or scrabble backwards away from their 

cases the attack roll is one grade harder, and Choose Location may attacker. 

not be taken if a special effect is won. This assumes the cover is 
FLlyYiInNgG COoMmBbAaTt 

not so extensive as to permit the target to move freely behind it. 
Fighting against flying creatures, and full scale aerial battles pro- 

Thus, someone lurking behind a small bush could still be attacked, 
vide a rather interesting dynamic to close combat, since most air- 

even though the attacker might not be able to see his quarry, but if 
borne creatures require constant movement to remain aloft. 

he was behind a lengthy hedge his position could not be accurately 
predicted. 

ATtTtAaCcKkIinNgG GRrOoUuNnDd--BBAaSsEedD TAaRrGgEeTtSs 

EvaADdIinNgG It can be difficult for ground-based characters to defeat airborne 
 

foes. Of course in some encounters the flying creature will hover or 
Protecting oneself from attacks such as volleys of ranged weap- 

land on the combatant, allowing combat to proceed normally. In 
ons, headlong charging beasts, and even destructive magical spells 

others the flying creature may fly back and forth, sweeping down 
can be exceptionally difficult, especially if the consequences will 

to make attacks before continuing back out of range. In the latter 
overwhelm or ignore a shield. In these situations often the best thing 

situation it is recommended that each ‘strafing’ run is treated as 
for a character to do is fling themselves to the side or dive behind 

Charging through Contact, see Charging page 102. This can make 
cover to escape. This is known as evading. 

airborne creatures deadly opponents unless ground based defenders 
Evasion attempts require an opposed roll of the attacker’s per- 

have some sort of ranged weaponry or cover. 
tinent skill versus the Evade skill of the defender. This could be 
anything from the Drive roll of a charioteer to the spell casting roll 

AEeRrIiAaLl COoMmBbAaTt ALlOoFfTt 
of a magician. If the attacker wins then they inflict damage as per 

Combat between aerial creatures or characters mounted on 
normal. If the defender wins damage is completely avoided. What- 

flying beasts should be handled slightly differently. Unlike ground 
ever the result, the evasive gambit leaves the defender prone, usually 

based fighting it often takes a significant period of time to jockey 
requiring him to regain his footing on his following turn. 

into a position where one airborne opponent can assault the other. 
If the winner of the opposed roll achieves one or more levels of 

Each brief engagement only allows one of them to attack before the 
success over his opponent, they may select suitable Special Effects as 

flying creatures travel apart, requiring them to manoeuvre again to 
per normal combat. 

see which gets the upper hand in the next pass. 
Evading may be made more difficult or rendered impossible 

Thus at the start of each round combatants must make an 
depending on the circumstances: 

opposed roll of their Fly skills (or Ride if a mount). The winner is 

& The character is helpless or entangled the one who can attack that round. If facing multiple opponents use 

& There is nowhere to evade to (balancing on a ledge whilst a group opposed roll, and all those who beat the lone participant 

scaling a cliff, for example) 
& A mounted character may only evade by flinging themselves 

clear of the saddle AEeRrIiAaLl TAaCcTtIiCcSs 
Airborne combat can be spiced up by introducing terrain and environ- 

Evading is not normally performed in close combat due to its mentalf actors. Clouds can be usedf or ambushes or places to escape battle. 
inherent disadvantages. However, a character facing a hand-to-hand Tall buzldings and narrow canyons can offer a dramatic setting in which to 
attack against which he has no applicable defence due to the lack of set chases, with the participants playing a deadly game of chicken if they 
a weapon (or an inferior sized one which won’t block the damage) Jail ther flying or riding rolls. An aerial battle could even involve support 
may have no other choice. Jure from the ground, forcing combatants to hoard their Action Points to 

In such cases evading provides only a temporary respite from evade deadly ballista bolts whilst trying to beat theirflying opponents. 
a determined opponent who decides to follow up, preventing the 

N 4 

103



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

may attack it that round. Attacks are resolved in a similar manner Movement value) than the opponent, and the mount itself is 
to charges, the recipient allowed to parry, evade or counterattack. not engaged in attacking. 

In the case of particularly large creatures or those travelling at & A mounted warrior may, at the cost of an Action Point, sub- 
high speed, the Games Master may wish to increase the manoeu- stitute either his own Combat Style or Ride skill instead of his 
vring time between passes, for example perhaps 1d3 rounds for a mount’s, to defend it against attacks. 
griffon or 1d6 rounds for a dragon. In these cases it is wise to limit & A mounted warrior may combine his SIZ with his mount’s for 
mounted archers or spell casters to acting on each pass, since most the purposes of avoiding Knockback, provided he passes an 
of the intervening time the rider will be thrown about in aerial acro- unopposed Ride roll. 
batics or the enemy target will be out of range. & A mounted warrior may, when charging with a braced 

weapon, substitute his own Damage Modifier for that of his 
KNnOoCcKkBbAaCcKk mount. A weapon braced for a charging attack cannot be 

An attack which imparts more damage than the SIZ of the recip- used to parry. If the weapon impales it must be left in the 
ient will, by default, result in him being knocked back. The dam- body of the target, or else break or dismount the rider as the 
age in this circumstance is before any reduction due to parrying or mount continues past. 
armour. On receiving such a blow, the recipient must pass an easy 
Acrobatics or standard Athletics roll to avoid falling prone. They are 

MuurtltiippLlEe OPpPpOoNnEeNnTtSs 
also thrust backwards one metre for each five points of damage (or 

Facing multiple opponents in MYTHRAS is often exceptionally 
fraction thereof) in excess of their SIZ. Proactively using the Brace 

dangerous. Whilst a character suffers no specific penalties to his 
combat action can reduce or even negate the effects of knockback. 

combat skills, he can soon become swamped by his opponents and 
Knockback differs from the Bash special effect in that Knock- 

rapidly run out of Action Points with which to defend himself. Once 
back is the automatic and accidental side effect of tremendously 

all his actions have been expended the character is treated as having 
powerful blows, whilst a Bash is a deliberate technique which relies 

failed his parry roll against any subsequent attacks, which in addition 
on timing and leverage. 

to any damage inflicted also leaves him vulnerable to Special Effects. 

LeEaAPpIinNgG ATtTtAaCcKkSs The best tactics to use against being outnumbered are: 

There are some animals, monsters, and even people who leap 
& Constrain the avenue of attack so that fewer opponents can 

upon their victims in order to knock them prone. Leaping attacks 
engage simultaneously 

can be launched from a variety of situations, but most are triggered 
& Tight as a formation to place disordered opponents at a 

as part of an ambush or at the conclusion of a charge. A few crea- 
disadvantage 

tures have the ability to leap atop an opponent without the need for 
& Outmanoeuvre around multiple opponents so that they inter- 

a run-up or superior height. 
fere with one another 

A leaping attack is resolved with an opposed roll of the leap- 
& Withdraw then flee the combat as quickly as possible 

er’s Athletics skill versus the defender’s Brawn or Evade skill. If the 
leaper wins then the defender is automatically knocked prone, with 
the attacker astride them. If the attack fails, the defender has weath- OUuTtMmAaNnOoEeUuVvRrIinNGg 
ered or sidestepped the impact. If the winner of the opposed roll A character facing multiple opponents can use movement to 

achieves one or more levels of success over his opponent, they may limit the number which can attack him at any one moment in time. 

select suitable Special Effects as per normal combat. This works by constantly shifting position, forcing some foes to 

No damage is inflicted as part of the leap; however a sub- start running around the flanks of their companions to re-establish 

sequently prone victim cannot recover his footing until either his reach or lines of attack, generally causing them to interfere with one 

attacker leaves him, or he eventually wins a Special Effect permitting another. Outmanoeuvring requires that the character has room to 

him to Arise. move about, and is not pinned in a confining area. It also assumes 

If the target is a quadruped, then it may substitute Athletics for that the character is engaged with the entire group of foes, rather 

Evade, and makes the attacker’s initial Athletics roll one difficulty than a specific individual. 

grade harder. In addition, leaping attacks only work against oppo- An example of outmanoeuvring in action would be a group of 

nents of up to twice the attacker’s SIZ. A target can make themselves guards trying to arrest a drunken barbarian in a tavern. The warrior 

more difficult to knock down by proactive use of the Brace combat could manoeuvre around the tables, chairs, and roof supports to 

action, provided they are aware of the impending leap attack. block the majority of his foes whilst he whittles them down one by 
one. 

MOoUuNnTtEeDd COoMmBbAaTt Outmanoeuvring requires that the character engages his oppo- 
Unless learned as part of specifically mounted combat styles (see nents in a group opposed roll of Evade skills. Every participant, both 

Combat Style Benefits page 88), the combat skills of a rider may the manoeuvring character and those foes who wish to corner him, 
not exceed their Ride skill. The advantages of being mounted are must spend an Action Point. Then they each roll once, and those 
considerable however: who fail to beat the manoeuvring character’s roll cannot attack him 

for the remainder of that Combat Round, being blocked by their 
& A mounted warrior rolls a 1D10+10 for the Hit Location of 

allies or terrain features. 
bipedal creatures, provided the target is lower than the rider. 

If the manoeuvring character beats all of his opponents he has 
& A mounted warrior can withdraw freely from engagement on 

the choice of safely engaging a single foe for the rest of the round or 
his turn provided his mount moves faster (i.e. has a higher 

Withdrawing from the fight completely. 

104



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

PAaSsSsIivVEe BLloOCcKkIinNgG or Insight versus Deceit for a betrayal. Difficulty modifiers should 

Passive Blocking is the placement of weapons and shields in such be applied in situations where the target is hindered, such as being 

a manner so that they effectively act as cover. Characters armed inebriated or dozing lightly. Conversely a bonus should be applied if 

with a weapon may hold it in such a way that it covers a chosen the target is suspicious or forewarned. If the target wins the opposed 

location (or locations when using a shield), but at the cost of being roll then the effects of surprise are negated. 

unable to actively parry with it (see Ward Location page 93). Any 
SwWEeEePp ATtTtAaCcKkSs 

attack which hits those locations automatically receives the benefit 
Sweep attacks occur when weapons or creatures of unusual size 

of the weapon or shield, reducing damage as normal. The tech- 
attack a closely clumped group of opponents — the scything tail of 

nique is commonly used when a warrior wishes to guard a weak spot 
a huge dragon for example — striking several foes simultaneously. A 

or wounded location. 
sweep attack is made by applying a single attack roll of the weapon 

It may seem paradoxical to sacrifice the ability to parry, poten- 
or creature to all targets in its path. Each defender must resolve the 

tially opening up a passively blocking character to an unopposed 
effects of the attack separately, and any special effects imposed on 

attack. However there are many situations it is a valid tactic: for 
the attacker are treated as having occurred concurrently. 

example when used by inexperienced troops or those lacking full sets 
Sweep attacks can also be used for other ‘area affect’ assaults, such 

of armour. In addition there is nothing which prevents a two weap- 
as the overhead smash of a giant’s tree trunk club or the unstoppable 

ons or weapon and shield combatant from using his other weapon 
charge of a giant triceratops. The games master decides how many 

to actively parry. 
foes are caught in the attack based upon the length or trajectory of 

Since passive blocking works in the same way as cover, the 
weapon, and his visualisation of the conflict. 

Choose Location special effect cannot be used to bypass the block in 
close combat, though opponents can still use the effect to strike other 

UNnAaRrMmEeDd COoMmBbAaTt 
unblocked areas. Assuming a shield, passive blocking against missiles 

Unarmed combat is the default Combat Style available to any 
becomes even better, since for ranged weapons Choose Location is 

person or creature, which covers the skill of fighting using only the 
a critical only. 

limbs and natural armaments of their own body. Some beasts have 
Crouching down behind a shield allows a character to double the 

a variety of natural weapons, each with a different reach and size, 
number of locations covered whilst passive blocking. 

which can make larger creatures particularly dangerous — able to 

PuLlLleEdD BLlows stand off’ at longer range, and still launch blows capable of smash- 
ing through the stoutest shields. The unarmed combat techniques 

Occasionally a character may wish to avoid maiming or killing 
used by animals and monsters are examined in more detail in the 

an opponent. This is achieved by ‘pulling’ a blow, limiting the force 
Creatures chapter. 

placed behind it or striking with a less lethal part of the weapon. A 
Although unarmed combat seems superfluous for warriors who 

pulled blow halves the damage inflicted on a successful hit. However, 
utilise weapons, it still provides a number of advantages: 

the intent to pull a blow must be stated before the attack is made, 
since it is near impossible to withhold a fully committed strike once & Unarmed combat can be used interchangeably with any 
it has been launched. other weapon style, provided the target is within reach of the 

attacker’s natural weapons. 
SUuRrPpRrIiSsEe 

& Unarmed combat can be used offensively for either strik- 
Surprise occurs when an unexpected attack is launched against 

ing or grappling an opponent. It is important for the user to 
opponents unaware of the attacker’s presence or intention. An 

declare which he intends in advance, since the resolution of 
ambush would be an example of the former, whilst treacherously 

each is handled slightly differently. 
turning on an unsuspecting ally during amiable conversation illus- 

& Unarmed combat can be used defensively to parry a weapon 
trates the latter. 

attack. Damage is reduced as per normal, according to the 
The effects of surprise on a target are potent: 

comparative Sizes of the natural and wielded weapon. Even 

& The target suffers a -10 penalty to initiative if no damage was stopped, the parry attempt might still pre- 

& Until their Initiative arrives they are considered flat footed vent the defender from suffering one or more Special Effects. 

and cannot defend themselves 
Note that if an unarmed combatant can step within the reach of 

& The first attack on the target, if’ successful, gains a bonus Spe- 
an armed opponent, he will reduce the effective Size of his oppo- 

cial Effect 
nent’s weapon, making it quite possible to parry blows without suf- 

& For the remainder of the round they may not perform any 
fering injury. 

offensive action 

PAaRrRrYyIinNgG WEeAaPpOoNnSs WHhILilSsTt UNnAaRrMmEeDd 
For example, an assassin who sneaks up on an oblwious guard, wins the ini- 

As previously described a Parry is actually a combination of par- 
tiative, and successfully strikes from behind would gain two special effects — one 

rying, blocking, and footwork to deflect the force of a blow. It is not 
Jor the attack’s success against the guard’s automatic failure; and a bonus onefor 

simply interposing an object into the path of an attack to stop it 
surprising um. If the assassin were using a dagger he could then choose Select 

dead — for example using a forearm to block the sweep of a sword — 
Locatwon: head, and Kill Silently, quietly stabbing the guard in the throat. 

since such an action would likely result in a mangled arm. 
As surprise can be so devastating, targets of such an attack should 

Instead most unarmed and armed combat styles use more sub- 
be permitted a chance to detect the impending conflict. For instance, 

tle techniques to gain maximum deflection for the minimum risk. 
an ambush might allow an opposed roll of Perception versus Stealth; 

Examples include, but are not limited to: Pressing against the hand 

105



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

or hilt of a weapon to change its line of attack, stepping very close to CLlIimMBbIinNgG 
cut down angular momentum of swung weapons, deflecting thrusts A climbing character has all of his combat skills capped by the 
by knocking aside the point or haft, or even grabbing a weapon on value of his Athletics skill. Bipedal characters are limited to fighting 
the haft or blade near its grip. with a single limb, requiring the other three to remain clinging to the 

Such methods rely on several points however; firstly that the par- vertiginous surface they are scaling. 
rying creature is intelligent enough to understand and use said tech- 
niques, and secondly that they are within unarmed range. The latter SwWIimMMmIinNGg 
point is perhaps the most crucial, and demonstrates the dangers of A swimming character has all of his combat skills capped by the 
facing an armed opponent with a longer reach. value of his Swim skill. Since water (and other fluids) impose signif- 

icant drag, only thrusting weapons are effective whilst submerged, 
STtRrIikKiInNgG and even those are reduced to half damage. Other weapons are 

Using unarmed combat to throw simple damage-inflicting strikes slowed to the point of impotence. Unarmed combat attacks which 
is resolved in the same way as normal weapon attacks. Some Special involve biting, strangulation or ramming are unaffected. 
Effects are specifically reserved for unarmed combat, namely Flurry, 
Grip, and Take Weapon. 

Calculating the damage, Size and Reach of natural weapons is WEeAaPpOoNn REeAaCchH –— CLlOoSsIinNgG 

defined on page 222 of the Creatures chapter. Human unarmed 
aAnNDd OPpEeNnIinNGg RAaNnGgEe 

attacks, for instance, have a size of Small, reach of Touch, and inflict 
Weapon Reach, and its associated mechanics for Closing and 

1d3 damage. 
Opening Range are optional rules for those desiring more realistic 

Some creature’s natural weapons and unarmed combat styles 
combat. 

may add other effects or impart inherent Special Effects on a suc- 
In general terms when two combatants face one another armed 

cessful strike. For example the gripping jaws of a crocodile or the 
with weapons of greatly disproportionate reach, the wielder of the 

poisoned stinger of a giant scorpion. 
longer weapon can keep his opponent at bay, preventing him from 

GRrAaPpPpLlI attacking. If however, the wielder of the shorter weapon can step 
inNgG 

Grappling attacks are resolved using an opposed roll of the attack- inside the effective reach of the longer, then the tables turn and the 

er’s Unarmed skill versus the combat skill used by the defender. If combatant with the longer weapon will find himself unable to parry 

the attacker wins then they establish the grapple, but if the defender with that weapon. 

wins the grapple fails. As with Evade, if one of the combatants The following rules assume a Reach difference of two or more 

achieves one or more levels of success over his opponent, they may steps between the longer and shorter weapon. Thus a dagger (Short) 

select an equal number of Special Effects. against a falchion (Medium) would suffer no penalties in combat, 

The effects of grappling depend on the location struck. A grap- whereas the same dagger against a great axe (Long) would. 

pled limb is rendered inoperable whilst grappling the head or torso 
FiIgGhHTtIinNgG AaTt TthHEe LoONnGgEeRr REeAaCchH 

imposes a difficulty penalty of Hard against any skill the opponent 
If fighting at the Reach of the longer weapon, then the user of 

attempts. In addition, on his following turns the grappler may make 
the shorter weapon cannot directly attack the wielder of the longer. 

unarmed attacks to inflict damage (equal to his Damage Modi- 
They are still considered to be engaged since the longer weapon can 

fier) on the body part by crushing, twisting or strangulating it. The 
still reach them. 

defender may oppose with his own Unarmed or Brawn skill in order 
In this situation the user of the shorter weapon can attack the 

to reduce or block the damage. 
longer weapon of his opponent, try to close the range between them, 

A grapple continues until the victim manages to break free. 
or hope to win an applicable Special Effect. If the longer weapon is 

Escape attempts are performed on the victim’s turn using the Strug- 
in fact the natural armament of a creature with superior reach, such 

gle combat action. This requires an opposed roll of either Brawn or 
as the tentacle of a colossal squid, the user of the shorter weapon 

Unarmed against whichever of the two skills the grappler prefers. If 
can directly attack the limb assaulting them. 

the grappled victim wins, they manage to break free. Note that some 
The intimidating threat of longer reach is an inherent advantage 

attackers using Brawn may be so strong that no amount of brute 
of two handed weapons, which offsets the disadvantage of not using 

force or cunning technique can overcome their grip. 
a shield. 

Grappling requires that the limb or appendage is empty, and is 
capable of hooking, sticking or gripping. 

FiIgGhHTtIinNgG AaTt TthHEe ShHOoRrTtEeRr REeAaCchH 
In the converse situation where the fighters are engaged at the 

UNnUuSsUuAaLl CoMmBbAaTt COoNnDdIiTtIioONnSs Reach of the shorter weapon, the user of the longer weapon will 

There are certain circumstances and environments which may find he cannot parry the attacks of the shorter. 

prevent a character from fighting at his full ability. Several are spe- The user of the longer weapon can still attack with the haft or 

cifically noted below, but other situations may occur which aren’t hilt of his now encroached weapon, but its efficacy is significantly 

covered by the rules. In such cases the Games Master should apply reduced. In this circumstance the weapon’s Size is reduced as many 

similar rules as appropriate to the fight. For example, a battle upon steps as the difference between the two weapons’ Reach, and only 

a treacherously slippery ice floe may require that combat skills be inflicts 1d3+1 damage due to the necessity of striking with the haft, 

capped by Acrobatics. pommel, guard from an awkwardly cramped position. 

106



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

At this point the best option for the user of the longer weapon is 
to reopen the range between them, draw a shorter backup weapon, RAaNnGgEedD COoMmBbAaTt 
defend themselves with their Unarmed skill, or hope to win a useful Ranged combat incorporates all forms of weaponry which 
Special Effect. In a last ditch situation the encroached fighter can require to be shot, thrown or slung to strike their target. The ranged 
attempt to Evade instead. weapons a character can use are listed as part of their combat styles 

- anything from throwing stones to firing a huge trebuchet. 
CLlOoSsIinNgG RAaNnGgEe Ranged attacks are resolved in an identical way to close com- 
A character that is being held at range by a longer weapon must bat. However, ranged weapons can normally only be parried with 

close on his opponent before being able to attack him. Two methods shields; those without must rely on natural cover or use Evade to 
are available to do this. dive out of the line of fire. Thus against lightly armoured foes, 

ranged weapons can be formidable deterrents. 
& Close Range Special Effect — automatically closes, but cannot 

Each ranged weapon has a number of specific attributes which 
be used unless a character has generated an opportunity for 

determine its effectiveness. The ones which have a key bearing on 
a Special Effect. 

combat are as follows: 
& Change Range Combat Action — costs an Action Point, and 

is used on a character’s Turn. 
FOoRrrcCEe 

In the latter case of attempting to Change Range, the charac- The ranged weapon equivalent of Size. It measures the penetra- 

ter’s opponent has two options, described below. In both cases if tive power of that weapon or its ammunition to determine whether 

the opponent has no Action Points left — or chooses not to spend an the blow overcomes a (shield) parry. 

Action Point — then the attempt to close is automatically successful. 
DAaMmAaGgEe MOoDIdFifIiEeRr 

& The combatants match Evade skills in an opposed test. If the This attribute shows whether or not the Damage Modifier of the 
character initiating the Change Range action wins then he attacker can be used to boost the ranged weapon’s damage roll. In 
can close the range to a desired distance. If the opponent general only bows and thrown weapons allow the user to apply their 
wins then the existing range is maintained. Damage Bonus. 

& However, if the opponent decides to attack the closing char- 
acter instead, then he must make an opposed roll of his RAaNnGgEe 
combat skill versus the closing character’s Evade skill. If the Three numbers separated by slashes, representing the maximum 

opponent wins, he strikes the character; and any difference Close, Effective, and Long ranges of the weapon or its ammunition. 

in Level of Success results in Special Effects as per normal Close range is the distance over which the Choose Location special 

combat. Whether or not the blow lands, the closing character effect may be used, provided the target is stationary or unaware of 

bridges the distance, and gains the advantage of having the the impending attack. Effective range has no significant modifiers. 

shorter weapon. At long range the weapon can still inflict harm, but the amount of 
damage is halved and Force is reduced by one step. 

OPpEeNnIinNGg RAaNnGgEe REeLloOaAdD 
Opening Range works in the same way as Closing Range — but The time taken to reload a weapon which fires ammunition. 

obviously in reverse. The character can use Change Range to com- 
pletely withdraw from engagement. See Withdrawing below. 

SIitTuUaAtTiIoOnNaALl MOoDIdFifIiEeRrSs 

WIiTtHhDdRrAaWwIinNGg The table on page 108 provides some situational modifiers spe- 

Withdrawing from a fight means that the character extricates cific to ranged weapons. Where two or more situations are pertinent 

himself from close combat weapon range. This can be done in a myr- to the character, use the most severe. 

iad of ways, from physically pushing an opponent away, side-step- 
ping a committed attack or unexpectedly taking several large steps RAaNnGgEedD COoMmBbAaTt COoNnSsIiDdEeRrAaTtIioOnNSs 
backward. At this point they have not fled the battle entirely, but Whilst ranged weapons appear to be extraordinarily potent they 
have briefly opened up enough space to have disengaged that oppo- do suffer a number of restrictions, and have special rules covering 
nent, and consider new tactical options. their use. Specific notes concerning ranged attacks are as follows: 

Withdrawing is automatic when using the Withdraw special 
effect. Otherwise a character must attempt to break free by use of AIimMIinNgG 
the Change Range or Outmanoeuvre combat actions, in which case By spending additional time aiming a ranged weapon, a char- 
the opponent(s) may resist. acter can potentially increase his chance to hit. Aiming requires an 

Once he has disengaged himself, the withdrawing character may entire Combat Round steadying the weapon, and waiting for the 
on his next turn (for the cost of an Action Point): best opportunity to release, for example withholding a bowshot for 

a momentary lull in the wind or until a target moves between two 
& Reroll initiative 

obstructions. By aiming, the character may reduce the difficulty of a 
& Flee the battle entirely 

Situational Modifier by one grade. Additional rounds spend aiming 
« Seek out a new opponent to engage 

grant no further advantage. 
& Perform some other suitable act not covered here 

107



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

RAaNnGgEeDd COoMmBbAaTt SIitTuUaAtTiIoOnNaALl MOoDIdFifIiEeRrSs Tor characters with a more destructive bent, statistics for siege 

Situation Difficulty Grade engines are included in the Economics and Equipment chapter. 

Light Wind* Hard 
FIirRiInNgG iInNtToO Aa CRroOwWDd 

Moderate Wind* Tormidable Firing into the swirling ebb and flow of a melee can be a risky 
Strong Wind* Herculean business, even for the most proficient marksman. The unpredictable 

Gale, Storm or Worse* Hopeless movement of crowds and engaged opponents can easily result in an 

Target is Running Hard ally straying into the line of fire, during the time it takes for a ranged 
weapon to travel the intervening distance to its intended target. 

Target is Sprinting Tormidable 
Thus there is always a risk of accidentally striking someone other 

Target obscured by mist or is in partial 
than the original target being aimed at. 

darkness Hard 
When firing at a specific target at the edge of a crowd or melee, 

Target obscured by thick smoke, fog or is in ] 
Tormidable the attack suffers a difficulty grade of at least Hard. If trying to fire 

through a group to hit a target in its midst, or on the other side, the 
Target is completely obscured Herculean 

penalty should be raised to Formidable. 
Blinded or loss of primary perceptive sense Hopeless 

The result of the dice roll is very important. A marksman who 
Target prone Tormidable passes his attack roll despite the difficulty penalty has aimed true, 
Attacker is prone** Herculean and will hit his intended target. If however the marksman fails the 
Attacker is on unstable ground Hard roll, but would have succeeded if not for the firing into a crowd 

penalty, then an adjacent victim is struck instead. If more than one 
*Assumes the thrown weapon or ammunition is vulnerable to crosswinds; and supersedes the normal 

penalty imposed by winds on physical skills . target 1s in the line of fire, the Games Master should determine the 
victim randomly. 

**Penalty can be negated if using a crossbow from a prepared position. No matter who eventually becomes the target — intended or not 
—if they are aware of the impending attack, they are free to Evade 

DIiSstTaAnNCcEe PEeNnAaLlTtIiEeSs or Parry as normal. Any special effects won as part of the attack only 
The difficulty of hitting a target increases rapidly with the dis- 

apply to the original target, not any accidentally struck bystander. 
tance which separates it from the marksman. Distance is considered 
independent of a weapon’s Range, the latter being the performance FIirRiInNgG oONn tThHEe MOoVvEe 
characteristics of the weapon over set distances. A character is still permitted to use ranged weapons even whilst 

Distance penalties can be offset by the size of the target being mounted on an animal or vehicle. However in these circumstances 
aimed at. Hitting a mammoth at fifty metres is far easier than hit- their combat skill is capped by the Ride or Drive skill of the person 
ting a human at the same range. The table overleaf indicates the controlling the conveyance, which may or may not be the attacker 
difficulty grade adjustment of hitting various sized objects over himself. For example an archer riding in a two man chariot would 
incremental distances. These stack on top of other ranged combat have his attack skill capped by the Drive skill of his driver. 
situational modifiers. Ranged attacks cannot usually be performed if the attacker him- 

These values assume an active target in the open field. If shoot- self is moving at a gait faster than a walk, since their aim is con- 
ing a static object at a known range, for example a straw butt during stantly thrown off by the physical movement. One exception to this 
a competition, the Games Master may reduce the difficulty by a step are warriors trained in a Combat Style specialising in Skirmishing, 
or two. see page 89. However in this case the attacker’s attack percentage 

Whilst there are few creatures which achieve such gargantuan cannot exceed his Athletics skill. 
scales, there are other objects which can reach sizes in the hundreds; 
such as buildings, fortifications, and troop formations. On the battle- ImMPpAaLlIinNgG RAaNnGgEedD ATtTtAaCcKkSs 
field the near impossibility of striking a single man is replaced by the Ranged weapon projectiles which result in an impale, such as 
use of volley fire, saturating an area densely packed with men; in the an arrow or thrown javelin, clearly cannot be yanked free of the 
hope that a small proportion of projectiles will strike home. wound on the next turn by the marksman who threw or fired the 

weapon. However nothing stops a character in close combat with 

DiistTaAnNCcEe PEeNnAaLlTtIiEeSs 

Target SIZ 

10 or less 21-40 81-150 151-300 

1-20m 1 Step Harder No Effect 1 Step Easier 1 Step Easier 2 Steps Easier 2 Steps Easier 

21-40m 1 Step Harder 1 Step Harder No Effect 1 Step Easier 1 Step Easier 2 Steps Easier 

41-60m 2 Steps Harder 1 Step Harder 1 Step Harder No Effect 1 Step Easier 1 Step Easier 

i 61-80m 2 Steps Harder 2 Steps Harder 1 Step Harder 1 Step Harder No Effect 1 Step Easier 

2 81-100m 3 Steps Harder 2 Steps Harder 2 Steps Harder 1 Step Harder 1 Step Harder No Effect 

101-120m 3 Steps Harder 3 Steps Harder 2 Steps Harder 2 Steps Harder 1 Step Harder 1 Step Harder 

121-140m 4 Steps Harder 3 Steps Harder 3 Steps Harder 2 Steps Harder 2 Steps Harder 1 Step Harder 

Each 20m Tollow table progression 

108



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

Throwing weapons, for example javelins, necessitate the weapon 
REeAaLlIiSsTtIicC RAaNnGgEe PEeNnAaLlTtIiEeSs be drawn or plucked up in preparation. This normally only requires 

Trying to lat a man-sized target with a human powered mussile one turn to complete, as per the Ready Weapon action providing it 
weapon is actually much harder than most people expect. A shot must take is within reach. If a second throwing weapon is held in preparation 
inlo consideration physicalf actors such as cross winds, variances between in the off-hand, the caster can swap it over to his throwing hand as 
weight, flexibility and air resistance of each piece of (ostensibly identical) a Iree Action. 
ammunition, and the necessity to arch a shot or throw. Even humidity and 

Projectile weapons, such as slings or bows must be loaded. The 
heat can significantly affect the performance of weapons such as bows. number of turns it takes to load a ranged weapon is listed in its Load 

Further complicating the matter are the difficulty of judging range column on the Ranged Weapons table, page 65. 
accurately, and the diminiskiment in the percewed size of a target as range A character can reduce the time spent loading or readying by use 
increases. And this is assuming a stationary object! Complexity us_further of the Rapid Reload special effect. 
increased when attacking a moving target, because of the time it takes_for 
the weapon to reach the destination; even more so if that target staris to 
move erratically. 

Taking all thesefactors into account, it soon becomes evident that there Hiit LoOCcAaTtIioONnSs 
@5 a huge difference between how ranged weapons are portrayed in_fantasy Most successtul (weapon) attacks land on a specific hit location. 
and the realities of the real world. In actual fact most bow and spear This can be determined randomly or in some circumstances be 
hunters rely primarily on stealth to get very close, and are rarely able to selected by Special Effects such as Choose Location. To randomly 
hat large prey in the wild at ranges over a_few tens of metres. Fortunately calculate which location is been hit, roll 1d20 and compare the 
MrrHRras errs on the side of the heroc. number rolled with the relevant humanoid or creature Hit Location 

table. 
N 4 Animals and monsters usually have slightly different hit location 

tables than humanoids to reflect their own unique physiology. These 
the transfixed victim from subsequently attempting to grab the 

are listed as part of each being’s description in the Creature chap- 
impaling weapon to tear it free. 

ter. The humanoid Hit Location table is repeated here for ease of 
Note that the Size of an impaled weapon is different from the 

reference. 
Force it struck with. Ranged impaling weapons have a special col- 
umn denoting their actual size when considering the hindrances 

HuummAaaNnooOIidD HiiTt LoOCcAaTtIioONnSs 
caused by the Impale special effect. 

1d20 Hit Location 

LoOAaDdIinNgG RAaNnGgEedD WEeAaPpOoNnSs 1-3 Right Leg 

Before a ranged weapon can be used it must either be readied or 46 Left Leg 

loaded. This can often take significant time, slowing down a ranged 79 Abdomen 

combatant’s rate of fire. 10-12 Chest 

13-15 Right Arm 

16-18 Left Arm 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 19-20 Head 

Seeing that Master Zamothis is in trouble, Anathaym abandons the 
impaled halberd, and unwinds her sling from her forehead. At the start of Note than some attacks, especially magical ones or those pro- 

the next round she casts a lead slingshot into the tight melee surrounding her duced by particular monsters (a dragon’s fiery breath for example) 

desperately manoewvring mentor, aiming at a black coated centaur of prodi- may strike several Hit Locations simultaneously. Individual Hit 

glous musculature. Locations may be armoured, either from worn protection or the 

Her combat skill (Meerish Slinger style) is normally 67%. Since she does natural toughness of the creature’s outer surface. This is important 

not wish to accidentally strike Lamothis the roll us considered Hard, reducing when considering Damage and Wound Levels below. 

her skill to 45 %. 
Anathaym passes the attack roll, and selects the Stun Location special DAaMmAaGgEe AanNDd WOoUuNnDd LEeVvEeLlSs 

effect against the unsuspecting creature. Unluckily she rolls minimum damage, If an attack strikes successfully, it causes damage according to 
and her shot glances off its hindquarters with no apparent effect. the damage rating for the weapon (see the statistical entries for close 

Herf urst attack unnoticed, Anathaym reloads, and at the end of the round combat and ranged weapons in the Economics & Equipment chap- 
casts again. This time she does not do so well, rolling 52. Thus not onlyf adls ter, pages 63 to 65). A shortsword, for instance, inflicts 1d6 damage. 
lo strike the black centaur but since it us less than her normal skill (without the 
Jfiring into a crowd penally), it means she has struck a bystander. The Games 
Master states there are two other possible targets in immediate proximaty, a sec- 
ond (chestnut coated) centaur; and Master Jamothis himself A duce is rolled 
lo see whch of the two s struck, and to her horror Anathaym inadvertently 
hits her oblivious mentor. Fortunately thus time the slingshot inflicts no special 
effect, but still manages to draw a glare from the grizzled warrior when the 
shot clangs off lus crested bronze helmet. 

109



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

The rolled damage for the weapon or attack is modified by the 
certain conditions in the specific following order: WOoOuUnNdDIinNgG OPpPpOoNnEeNnTtSs WwIitThH  

aAnN EnNDdUuRrAaNnCcEe oOVvEeRr 100% 
& Apply the Damage Modifier for the character making the When a serious or major wound s inflicted against an opponent that 

attack possesses an Endurance over 100%, the opposed test should take into 
& Modify the damage from any weapon enhancing (or reduc- account the penally applied by the higher skill in the contest. In the rare 

ing) magic cases where Endurance s the hugher skill, it s recommended that the pen- 
& 1If parried, reduce the damage appropriately as per the com- ally us imposed retroactively to attacker’s skill — potentially downgrading 

parative weapon sizes the success level of the original attack roll. 
& I the hit location is armoured, reduce damage by the Armour T s does not mean that the attacker missed his original attack, merely 

Points value that the deadliness of the wound is reduced and it becomes easeer for the 

If the damage inflicted by the attack is above zero, then the hit victim to win the opposed test. 

location sustains that amount of damage, with the damage total - 4 
being immediately removed from the location’s Hit Points. Note 
how many Hit Points the location has remaining, and the wound ongoing penalty of one difficulty grade, until the injury is reduced 

category that results. to a Minor Wound. 

& Minor Wound: Hit Location still has positive Hit Points 
Maajjor WOoUuNnDd 

& Serious Wound: Hit Location is reduced to zero Hit Points 
If a location is reduced to a negative score equal or greater than 

or below 
its starting Hit Points, the character receives a Major Wound. The 

& Major Wound: Hit Location is reduced to a negative score 
character is immediately incapacitated, unable to continue fighting. 

equal or greater than its starting Hit Points 
Alimb is considered to be severed, transfixed, shattered or ripped 

Use the following rules if a location receives a Serious or Major off by a Major Wound. The character drops prone, physically inca- 
wound. Note that wounds requiring Endurance checks test them in pacitated, and must immediately make an opposed test of Endur- 
an opposed roll against the value of the original attack roll. This ance versus the successful attack roll of his enemy. Failure results in 
reflects the ability of highly skilled warriors to make more deadly unconsciousness from the agony. If a severed, punctured or ripped- 
strikes. Endurance rolls are not repeated unless the location is off location is not treated within a number of minutes equal to five 

wounded again. times his Healing Rate, the character dies from blood loss and shock. 
The victim of a Major Wound to the Abdomen, Chest or Head 

MiiInNoOrR WOoUuNnDd drops unconscious, totally incapacitated and must immediately 
make an opposed test of Endurance versus the successful attack 

Minor wounds are cuts, scratches, bruises and sprains. They 
roll of his enemy. Failure results in an instant and gratuitous death 

hurt, may bleed, but are not significant enough to slow down or 
(decapitated, chopped in half, impaled through the heart, torn apart, 

hamper the victim. 
and so forth). If he survives, and the location is not treated within a 
number of Combat Rounds equal to twice his Healing Rate, he still 

SEerRiIoOuUSs WOoUuNnDd dies from blood loss and shock. 
If a location is reduced to zero Hit Points or below, the victim Since most Major Wounds require some form of surgery or 

receives a Serious Wound. The location is permanently scarred, and major magic to heal, the sufferer will be very unlikely to recover 
the victim cannot attack or start to cast spells (but can still parry or from a major wound in time to rejoin combat. Depending on the 
evade) for the next 1d3 turns due to being stunned or distracted by available treatment the wounded location will be potentially maimed 
the pain of the wound. (see Healing from Injury page 80). 
A character suffering a Serious Wound to a limb must immedi- 

ately make an opposed test of his Endurance versus the successful 
HEeRrOoIiCc LAaSsTt ACcTtIioONnSs 

attack roll of his enemy. Failure results in the limb being rendered 
In special cases where key characters receive a Major Wound, 

useless, until the location is restored to positive hit points. If a leg, 
the Games Master might allow a heroic last action - such as spitting 

the victim drops prone. If an arm, he drops whatever he is holding 
out one last spell, attempting to cut down their slayer, crawling away 

unless the object is strapped on (use common sense here). 
to hide, or trying to tourniquet their own wound. They must have 

A character suffering a Serious Wound to the Abdomen, Chest 
working limbs applicable to the action, and burn a Luck Point. They 

or Head must immediately make an opposed test of his Endur- 
get a single opportunity to attempt their action, and then immedi- 

ance versus the successful attack roll of his enemy. Failure results in 
ately collapse into unconsciousness, and probable death. 

unconsciousness for a number of minutes equal to the amount of 
damage sustained in the attack causing the Serious Wound. First Aid 
or Healing skills can be used to help an unconscious victim regain 
consciousness, but he will not be able to rejoin any combat until he 
has received further healing to the Seriously Wounded location. 

At the Games Master’s discression, even if the character remains 

functional, all tasks requiring use of that body location will suffer an 

110



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

— eager yet incompetent. In terms of conflict, members of a rabble 
ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 

Guving up on her sling, Anathaym recovers her shortsword and rushes use the following guidelines: 

o ad Master Zamothis, who despite cutting down two of the formidable & Rabble have little or no armour 
centaurs s becoming rapidly exhausted. Just as she arrives, the big black 

& Rabble are too incompetent to be able to use Special Effects 
centaur smashes through the last of her mentor’s shueld, and with s return & Rabble have Hit Points equal to one fifth (rounded up) of the 
blow catches Zamothis full in the head. Despite the protection of his helmet CON+SIZ of an average member of that race 
the aging warrior is knocked down, out of thefight with a Major Wound. & Once they receive any damage, they cease fighting 

Anathaym screams with_fury and leaps astride the centaur’s back, taking & If the damage is less than their Hit Points they flee cursing or 
it completely by surprise. On her next turn she stabs with her shortsword. The yelling in fear 
gods are with her and she rolls a critical success. Since the centaur was unable & If the damage equals or surpasses their Hit Points, they 
lo defend with its club, she gains two special effects and chooses Maximise 

collapse clutching the wounded location, and weeping or 
Damage and Impale, driving her blade deep into its back. Although this might screaming in agony 
havef inished off a human, the centaur is somewhat tougher. On its own turn & If the damage is double their Hit Points, they dic in a spectac- 
it rears, throwing her off: Anathaym_fails her Athletics roll and lands prone — ular and grotesque manner 
unarmed and helpless before the enraged creature. & Once one third of their number are dead or wounded, the 

As it raises ats great club to_finish her off; theforgotten Master Zamothis rest of the rabble break and take flight 
spends a Luck Point to perform a Herow Last Action and rallies long enough 
lo cast s knife at the centawr. 1tf lies true, striking the beast in the chest, near 
to where the tip of Anathaym’s shortsword emerges. Thus us enough to give the UNnDdEeRrLlIinNGgSs 
centaur a Serwous Wound, forcing it to make an opposed roll of its Endurance 

Underlings are competent foes usually sent en-masse to harass 
against the attack 1oll of the thrown knife. Jamothis wins with the higher roll, 

Adventurers: thuggish bodyguards irregular troops in the opening 
and. the centaur chuef collapses with a look of surprise. 

stages of a battle, for example. Despite not being tracked as full char- 
The remaining centaurs take this as an omen, and lacking the steadying 

acters, underlings can prove deadly if they catch their targets unpre- 
presence of their sorceren; turn tail andf lee. Anathaym crawls over to the now 

pared. Similar to rabble, Underlings use the following guidelines: 
unconscious body of her beloved mentor and performs First Aud on his cracked 
skull, saving his life. Then with the help of the rescued youth, they carry the & Underlings wear moderate amounts of armour 
old man back to Meeros. & Underlings are freely able to use Special Effects 

& Underlings have Hit Points equal to one fifth of the CON+- 
SIZ of an average member of that race 

OPpTtIioONnAaLl RUuLlEeSs:: & Once they receive two injuries, they cease fighting and if’ pos- 
sible, withdraw cursing or yelling in fear 

RAaBbBbLlEe & UNnDdEeRrLlIinNGgSs & If the damage equals or surpasses their Hit Points, they auto- 
matically fail the Endurance roll, suffering the effects of a 

Only use these optional rules when the characters are_facing a ravening horde of Serious Wound in the location struck 

inconsequential and expendable adversaries. Competent NPCs and major villains & If the damage is double their Hit Points, they die in a grue- 

should be treated differently somely violent manner 
& Once half their number are dead or wounded, the rest of the 

underlings withdraw from the fight 
A mainstay of some fantasy literature is the scene of heroes 

scything down hordes of faceless opponents, be they enemy soldiers, 
fanatical cultists or even ravening demi-humans. To portray such 
battles in MYTHRAS can not only be time consuming enterprises, but 
are also difficult to pull off satisfactorily considering the ever pres- 
ent risk of becoming outnumbered or rolling a fumble at the wrong 
time. Luck Points can only help so far. 
A better way of modelling these types of encounter is to provide 

weaker foes or simplify the book keeping required to keep track of 
injuries. MYTHRAS offers alternate options to dealing with this issue, 
thus speeding up combat considerably. 

RAaBbBbLlEe 
Rabble are foes who intimidate by their numbers but in actual 

fact have little prowess or willingness to remain in combat once 
blood is shed. They can take many forms from vicious beggars who 
set upon drunken characters when they stumble home from the tav- 
ern along dark alleyways; or the mindless adherents of a dark cult 

111



