Mythras:  Skills

— — 
|( I R i KI T S (LR SO QR <N B o B LB | 2 < B < e 

Skills
— — 

= i X o5 o3 oKk moWo > 
Yy m il S (LR SO QR <N B o B LB | 2 < B < e 

f characteristics and attributes define what a character is like, 

I CRrIiTtIicCaALlSs aAnNDd FuUMmBbLlEeSs 
] skills define what he can do. As explored in the previous chap- 

Criticals and Fumbles represent spectacular successes and cata- 
ters, all characters have a diverse set of skills drawn from their 

strophic failures; those cases where a character has either excelled in 
vocation and cultural backgrounds. This chapter explains how skills 

his attempt or failed miserably and utterly. 
work, and provides greater definition for each skill used in MYTHRAS. 

Skills are divided into two categories: Standard and Professional. & A Critical success is equal to one-tenth of the skill’s value (and 
Every character has the same set of Standard Skills. Professional this includes skills that receive a modifier — so modified skills 
Skills differ between individual characters and reflect expertise may have a greater or lesser chance of a Ciritical outcome). 
developed within a career and, to a certain extent, their culture. Round fractions up when calculating a Critical success’s 
Despite these distinctions, Standard and Professional Skills work in range. For example, if a skill is modified to twice its normal 
the same way. value — from 40% to 80% say, then its critical range would be 

This chapter looks, first of all, at the basics of how skills work. a roll of 08 or less. 
Then the skills, Standard and Professional, are described. The chap- « A Fumble is roll of 99 or 00. Skills with a value of more than 
ter then concludes with some additional rules for how to handle skills 100% fumble only on a roll of 00. 
in different ways, and under different circumstances. 

The precise nature of a Critical or Fumble result is left to the 
Games Master to determine. The consequences could be wondrous 

How Sk or dire, depending on the circumstances. However, some examples 
iiLlLls WOoRrKk of Ciritical and Fumble outcomes for each skill MYTHRAS uses are 

A skill has a base value based on two characteristics; or one char- given in the skill descriptions later in this chapter. 
acteristic multiplied by two. There is no upper limit to a skill’s value; 
it can exceed 100 and, in the course of play, characters can expect to AUuTtOoMmAaTtIiCc SUuCcCcEeSsSsEeSs 
see their skills reach such heights. 

There will be some occasions where a roll against a particular 
Whenever a character is called upon to resolve some form of test, 

skill just isn’t necessary — either because the task at hand is easily 
challenge or professional ability 1d100 is rolled and compared with 

accomplished, or because, with enough time and concentration, 
the skill’s value: 

success is guaranteed. Riding a horse at a gentle canter across an 

& Equal to, or less than, the skill indicates a success open meadow is an example of an Automatic Success where simply 

& Greater than the skill’s value indicates a failure being skilled in the activity means that straightforward actions do 
not require any skill roll to resolve them. A crafter carving a piece 

There are certain special cases concerning success and failure of wood into a chair leg is another example where a skill roll is not 
that should be noted. necessary; it takes time to accomplish, but the craftsman knows how 

& Any roll of 01-05 is always a success to do the work and, if he is not rushing, success is assured. A thief, 

& Any roll of 96-00 is always a failure, irrespective of how high undisturbed, with a set of lockpicks, can successfully pick the simple 

the skill’s value lock of a treasure chest given enough time to do so. 

37



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

WHhEeNn tToO ROoLlLl? SimMPpLlUiIfFiIeEdD DiirfrfFiiccuulLtTy GRrAaDdEeSs 
Part of the fun and drama of MYTHRAS comes in making a roll Whilst difficulty grades are designed to scale with character 

against a skill to see if success or failure is the outcome. It can be skill, some Games Masters may find applying penalties results in 
tempting to call for skill rolls for each and every challenge but, as the slowing down of their game. As an alternative the following 
outlined above, there are some cases where rolls are not needed. A option is provided: 
list of likely scenarios where skill rolls are redundant is as follows: 

SimPpLlIiFfIieEdD Diirfrficurlty GRrAaDdEe TAaBbLlEe 
& The activity or task is very routine to the character 

Difficulty Grade Skill Modifier 
& The character has enough time and all the tools necessary 

Very Easy +40% 
& The circumstances and environment do not impose any stress 

Easy +20% 
& There are no significant consequences to failure 

Standard None 

Skill rolls should be used when they have a dramatic purpose. For Hard -20% 
example, although riding a horse at a gentle canter requires no skill 

Formidable -40% 
roll, fleeing at a gallop from pursuing bandits does. Carving a chair 

Herculean -80% 
leg may be a routine task for a carpenter, but carving an exquisite 
chair leg, with blunt tools, and in only a few hours, for a demanding 8 P 
sultan who executes those who do not please him, would need a skill 
roll. It is usually obvious when a dramatic purpose arises and a skill 
roll is necessary, but if in doubt, consider the consequences of fail- StTaAnNdDaArRdD SKkIiLlLlSs 
ure: are they crucial to the plot? Does the chance of failure heighten Standard skills are common to everyone. They represent innate 

tension, and make for an exciting possibility? Will a failure — or even abilities and skills that most people employ on a regular basis from 

superb success — add fun to the game? If the answer is Yes to any of any walk of life. 

these, then have the character make a skill roll. 

ATtHhLlEeTtIiCcSs (SSTTRR+DEX)) 
MOoDdIFifYyIinNGg SKkIiLlLlSs Athletics covers a range of physical activities, including climb- 

There are some occasions where a skill roll is required but the ing, jumping, and running. If an adventurer is wearing armour, the 

chances of success need to be adjusted to reflect particular condi- distances he can climb, run or jump are affected by the Armour 

tions. Fleeing bandits, for instance, might require an Athletics roll. Penalty. The Movement section on page 69 describes these effects. 

But what if the character is fleeing through darkness or through 
treacherous undergrowth? In such a case the Games Master can insist CLlIimMBbIinNgG 
on modifying the skill of the character to reflect the circumstances. With the right surface (hand and footholds), the right equipment 

MyYTHRAS uses a series of grades to determine how a skill is mod- (ladders, ropes, pitons), and enough time, characters can climb any 

ified. These are as follows: surface without the need for a roll. Under normal circumstances, 
use the following guidelines: 

Diirfrficurlty GRrAaDdEe TAaBbLlEe 
& Climbing a rough or rugged surface (branching trees, scaf- 

Difficulty Grade Skill Modifier 
folds, piles of rubble, and so on): Half the Armour Penalty 

Automatic No need to roll (rounded up) is subtracted from the character’s base Move- 
Very Easy Double the skill value ment. If the result is zero or less, they are too encumbered by 
Easy Add half again to the skill value armour to climb. 

Standard No adjustment. & Climbing a steep surface (pitched roofs, steep hills, and so 

Hard Reduce the skill value by one third on): The Armour Penalty is subtracted directly from the base 

Tormidable Reduce the skill value by half Movement. If the result is zero or less, they are too burdened 
by armour to climb. 

Herculean Reduce the skill value to one tenth 
& Climbing a sheer surface (walls, cliff faces, and so on): Double 

Hopeless No attempt can be made 
the Armour Penalty is subtracted from the base Movement. 
As with previous situations, if the result is zero or less, the 

Where a character is already suffering a penalty from other cir- 
character cannot climb. 

cumstances the hardest difficulty grade takes precedence. 
& Tests should be made for treacherous surfaces (such as sheer 

MyTHRAS does not provide a definitive list of situations and chal- 
cliffs or wet surfaces), and if a character is distracted, or even 

lenges which can incur skill modifications. What sort of modifica- 
attacked, during his ascent or descent. 

tion is required for any particular skill or context is ultimately up 
to the Games Master to decide; according to the capabilities of the A critical success permuts the climber to scale the surface extremely quickly or 
characters, his perception of the difficulty of the situation, and the avoid any hidden danger involved with the attempt. 
dramatic tension at that particular moment. A failure merely indicates that the climb was aborted. 

A fumbled Climbing roll results in a_fall; furthermore the character cannot 
attempt an Acrobatics roll (if he has that skill) to reduce falling damage. 

38



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

JuumMPpIinNgG distractions and optimal conditions, a Boating roll is unnecessary, 

A successful Athletics roll allows one to jump up to twice one’s although lesser skilled characters may take longer to get where they 

own height horizontally or up to half one’s own height vertically need to as they manage the boat’s handling. 

(if the character has at least a five metres run-up available). If the A critical Boating success increases the vessel’s Movement rate by one tenth. 

jumper is jumping from a standing position then these distances A failed Boating roll implies the boat’s movement rate is halved or it failed 

are halved. Any jump of over half a character’s maximum distance to reach uts intended destination; for instance navigating to an isolated rock posi- 

results in him falling prone on landing. tioned above a waterfall. 
A fumbled Boating roll indicates losing an oay; taking on water or some other 

& If wearing armour reduce the jump distance in metres by serious tnconvenzence. If the weather is bad or the water violent, then a_fumble 
half the Armour Penalty to a minimum of one normal step. causes the boat to capsize. 

& Tor every full 20% a character has in Athletics, he can add an 
extra metre to a horizontal jump, or 20cm to a vertical one, if BraAwWNn (SSTTR+SSIIZ)) 
he has space to perform a run up. 

Brawn is the efficient application of technique when applying 
On a cnitical success the character adds a further metre to hus total distance, raw physical force. The skill covers acts of applied might, including 

and remains upright on landing. lifting, breaking, and contests of strength. 
A fumbled roll indicates the character has landed awkwardly. He must imme- 

duately make an Endurance roll. If the Endurance roll s a success 1 pownt of LIifFtTiInNgG 
damage 15 sustained to one leg. If the Endurance test fails, then 1d4 poiwnts of A character can lift and carry up to their STR in SIZ up off the 

damage 1s inflicted instead. ground, or drag double this amount, without needing a Brawn roll. 
As a mass equivalent, 1 point of SIZ equals, roughly, 5 kilograms. 

RUuNnNnIinNGg Tor every full 10% he possesses in the skill the character may add an 
A higher Athletics skill allows a character to run at a higher speed extra point of SIZ or 5kg to his total. 

over short or long distances. For SIZ or mass above this the character needs to succeed in a 
Brawn roll. The maximum weight a character can briefly lift is equal 

& For every full 25% a character has in Athletics, he can add 
to twice their STR, plus whatever bonus they gain from their skill. 

an extra metre to his base Movement when sprinting, or half 
Failing the Brawn roll may result in injury; the character must make a suc- 

that when running over longer distances. In certain situations 
cessful Endurance roll or suffer 1d3 points of damage to a random location 

where space may be limited, such as Charging within a melee, 
below the head. 

the character can decide not to apply this bonus, and remain 
Fumbling the Brawn roll automatically results in injury. 

at his base racial or species movement. 
Note that the size and shape of an object might make it impossi- 

On a critical success the character adds a_further metre to hus Movement rate. 
ble to lift, even if it is within the character’s weight capacity. 

A failure causes the runner to increase a level of fatigue. 
A fumbled roll indicates the character has pulled a muscle or torn a ligament, BRrEeAaKkIinNgG 

and must cease running He must immediately make an Fndurance roll. If the A character can use Brawn to break objects with their bare 
Endurance roll 15 a success 1 point of damage s sustained to one leg If the hands — such as shoulder barging a wooden door. Take the char- 
Endurance testfauls, then 1d4 points of damage 1s inflicted instead. acter’s maximum lifting capacity in SIZ and apply that value to the 

Damage Modifier table on page 9 to determine how much damage 
ThHRrOoWwIinNGg 

can be inflicted with each Brawn attempt, remembering that failed 
Athletics can also be used for hurling large, unwieldy objects 

rolls may result in injury. 
over distance or tossing smaller items with accuracy. Throwing is 
restricted for sports or improvised missile weapons - everything from COoNnTtEeSsTtSs oOFf StTrReEnNgGtThH 
small stones to bar stools. Weapons which are thrown using a spe- Brawn rolls can also be used in opposed tests for breaking free 
cific technique to ensure it strikes point or blade first (rather than from the grip of others, arm wrestling, and tugs of war. Such events 
just achieving distance), such as javelins, axes or knives, use their are handled as a simple opposed roll. However, there comes a point 
Combat Style instead. where technique cannot overcome superior size and strength. In a 

contest, if a character’s Damage Modifier is smaller than his oppo- 
& A thrown object has a maximum range of one metre for every 

nents, his Brawn roll suffers a penalty; a difference of one step raises 
point the character’s STR exceeds the object’s SIZ. 

the difficulty to Hard, whilst two steps increases it to Formidable, 
and so on. Naturally the penalty is suffered by his opponent if the 

BoAaTtIinNgG (SSTTRR++CCOON)) character is the stronger. 
The Boating skill covers the operation of small floating craft on 

rivers, lakes, and close inshore. Appropriate vessels are generally CooNncEceeAalL (DDEXX+PPOOW)) 
boats, canoes or rafts which travel short distances, and are unsuited 

Conceal is the counterpoint to Stealth, being the concealment 
to the rigours of the open sea. Most are propelled using oars, pad- 

of large objects rather than the character themselves. For instance 
dles, punts or simple sails; or can even be towed by animals. Ships 

conceal could be used to hide a chariot behind some rocks, or sweep 
with large crews or designed for long, overseas journeys are covered 

away the wheel ruts of the chariot so its path cannot be tracked. 
under the Seamanship professional skill. 

The skill is versatile in application, anything from hiding a scroll in a 
The skill measures a character’s competence in propelling a boat 

library to disguising the presence of a trap or secret passage. 
in the right direction and dealing with adverse conditions. With no 

39



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

A critical success using Conceal indicates that the object has been hidden so Deecceerirt (IINNTT++CCHA)) 
cunningly that rolls attempting to discover it are one difficully grade harder. 

Deceit covers all instances where a character attempts to mask 
A failed Conceal roll means that the object will automatically be_found if 

the truth and offer a deceit of some kind; barefaced lying, mislead- 
actively searchedf or. 

ing a guard or even bluffing (or cheating) during a card game. The 
A fumbled Conceal roll indicates that the attempt backfres spectacularly with 

skill also covers instances where hiding true emotions or motives is 
the objectf alling, rolling, blowing out of its hiding place so blatantly (or otherwise 

necessary (feigning pleasure when one is bitterly disappointed per- 
revealed in an appropriate manner) that it draws the attention of everyone nearby. 

haps, or attempting to seem welcoming and open when the opposite 
is true). Deceit forms a counterpart to the Insight skill, and can be 

CuussttooMmms (IINNT x2) used to oppose Insight rolls when others are attempting to discern 
Customs represents the character’s knowledge of his own com- either truth or motive. 

munity; its social codes, rites, rituals, taboos, and so on. The skill On a critical success the character has pulled off the deceit convincingly to the 
is used when it is essential to accurately interpret or perform any point where the truth will not be questioned in thefuture by those who are subject 
socially important custom or to behave in a particular way. lo the deception — unless something happens lo expose the truth. 
A critical success with Customs indicates that the character has acted in an A farled Deceit roll indicates that the character lacked conviction or believabil- 

exemplary fashion or percewed a very subtle social nuance that will be of imme- iy, promptingf urther investigation. 
diate or later value. A fumbled Deceit roll represents a miserablef ailure to deceive — one so trans- 
A failed Customs roll results in wry humour or minor irritation. A _fumbled parent that others may have difficully believing the character at a_future time. 

Customs 10!l indicates that the character has badly failed to observe his commu- 
nity’s customs, and may have even given offence — whether intentional or not. Drriive (DDEXX+PPOOW)) 

The ramifications of a_fumbled roll depend very much on the nature of the 
Drive covers the control of wheeled or drawn vehicles, whether 

culture or communty, and may thus have very different outcomes, ranging from 
by one or more beasts of burden or more esoteric means: such as 

harsh rebuke, through ostracism, exile or even violent punishment. 
carts, carriages, chariots or sleds. Drive rolls are needed when a 
character wants to do something out of the ordinary with a vehicle 

DAaNnCcEe (DDEX+CHA)) — traverse treacherous terrain, jump obstacles, and so on. A roll is 
Just about every culture uses dance in some way — either as rec- also necessary if the vehicle being driven is drawn by different beasts 

reation or as part of important rituals. It might be a court dance, a than the driver is used to (horses instead of oxen, for example) or 
war dance, or a simple set of movements accompanying a prayer there are more or fewer beasts teamed together to pull the vehicle (a 
or ceremonial chant. The Dance skill measures a character’s ability four-horse wagon when the character is used to a two-horse team). 
to move rhythmically and accurately (to a reasonable degree) when In cases where either the beasts or their number are radically unfa- 
called upon to do so. miliar, a tiger drawn chariot for example, then the roll should be 
A critical success resulls in a dance that is expresswe, fluid, and perhaps made more difficult. 

deeply affecting for those who witness it. The dance s as persuasive as any Where two or more vehicles are contesting with each other, per- 
Influence 10ll, and can be used as such in situations resting on communication haps to overtake or force another off the road, the drivers should 
and personal credibility. Alternatively any subsequent Influence lest is giwven a determine the result with an opposed Drive test. 
bonus equal to the critical score of the Dance skill. Of cowrse, a critical Dance 
roll may very well result in tumultuous applause, and tokens of admiration and 
appreciation. 

A failed Dance roll signi- 
Jies a lacklustre performance. 

A fumbled Dance s 
clumsy to both the dancer 
and those who watch it. The 
dancer trips or stumbles. Pas- 
son s lost, the execution s 
weak, and the dance fails to 
convey what it s meant to. 
Any skills resting on commu- 
nicaton and personal credi- 
bility will suffer a penally at 
the discretion of the Games 
Master. 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

A critical Drive roll either increases the vehucle’s Movement rate by one tenth ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
or permats the driver lo perform some_feat of skilful orflamboyant driving. Anathaym, investigating a ruined temple, comes across a sarcophagus in 

A failed Driwe roll halves the vehicle’s Movement. the catacombs. She tries to open i, and triggers the centuries-old dart trap set 
A fumbled Drive roll indicates either that the vehicle has broken down in by the sarcophagus’s designer. The trap-setter’s skill at the time was 65%; 

some manner (wheel comes off or the harness breaks for example), or if the Anathaym’s Evade is 57 %o which she must pit against the trap in an opposed 
velicle is engaged in a high speed or dangerous manoewvre, it becomes unstable roll. 
and overturns. An overturning vehicle requires all occupants to make a successful Amathaym scores 45, and the Games Master rolls 31. Both are successful 
Acrobatics or Evade 1oll to leap clear of the wreckage, or sustain an amount of but Anathaym wins the contest with the higher roll. The trap is sprung as 
Jalling damage commensurate with its speed (see page 78). Anathaym lfls the sarcophagus lid, shooting a hail of darts towards herf ace; 

but Anathaym throws herself desperately to one side and, fortunately for her, 

EnNDdUuRrAaNnCcEe (CCOON x2) the darts strike the wall behind. 

Endurance is a character’s capacity to endure physical stress, Brushing herself down as she stands, Anathaym reflects on the dangers of 

pain, and fatigue. It measures the body’s ability to deal with poten- ancient tombs, unaware of the guardian mummy lurching towards her from 

tially damaging or debilitating conditions, and is a general gauge of belind... 

resilience, stamina, and metabolism. Endurance, like its counterpart 
A failed roll usually means the character suffers whatever musfortune they 

Willpower, is used in any number of ways, but most specifically to 
were attempting to avoud. 

resist the possible effects of injuries, including harmful poisons and 
1If the Evade roll is fumbled, then the character has lefl himself wide open to 

disease. 
the hazard, for instance sustaining maximum damage from a trap or ending up 

In most cases Endurance is used in Opposed 'Tests but there are 
prone, and vulnerable to a_follow up event. 

some circumstances where it is used as a standard skill roll. 
The effects of Criticals and Fumbles during combat us a special case (see the 

A critical Endurance roll usually indicates that the character has managed to 
rules for Evading in the Combat chapter; page 105). 

shrugoff” the worst possible assault on his body. In the case of injury he s ofien 
able to act when ordinarily he might be incapacitated. 

A failed Endurance roll resulls in the character succumbing to whatever stress FirstT AiidD (DDEX+INT)) 
or tnjury it has been put under. A Fumbled roll means that the character is over- First Aid measures a character’s ability to treat minor injuries 
whelmed by the circumstances and becomes incapacitated. In the case of disease and stabilise severe ones. First Aid may be applied only once per spe- 
or powson he automatically fails any further resistance rolls against it. cific injury. Thus a character thatis slashed twice in the leg may have 

each wound treated separately. If suffering some form of bodily 

Evadpe (DDEX x2) harm which simultaneously affected several body areas at once, such 
as being burned by Dragon Breath, then a First Aid attempt is per- 

Evade is used to escape from observed, impending danger, and 
mitted for each individual location. 

can be used against ranged weapons (by diving for cover, for exam- 
A character can self-administer First Aid, although depending 

ple), avoiding traps, changing the engagement distance in combat, 
on the circumstances (such as the location of the wound, its degree 

and generally getting out of the way of a potential physical hazard. 
of severity and so forth) the roll may be subject to a greater degree 

It can also be used as a resistance roll for certain types of magic. 
of difficulty. 

Usually Evade will be opposed by another roll, but it may also be 
Applying First Aid takes 1d3 minutes. Neither party can do 

a standard roll in its own right. Trying to negate damage by leap- 
anything else during the treatment. When tending life threatening 

ing clear of a crashing vehicle, as mentioned in the Drive skill, is 
trauma, the patient is temporarily stabilised until the result of the 

an example of a standard Evade roll. The typical circumstances for 
opposed rolls are as follows: 

FIirRsstT AIidD ACcTtIioONnSs 
AVvOoIiDdIinNgG MISisSsIiLlEeSs Injury Successful Treatment 

Evade is opposed by the Combat Style of the attacker. Asphyxiated The victim begins breathing again. 

Bleeding The blood flow is staunched. 
THhWwAaRrTtIinNgG Aa TRrAaPp 

The impaling item is removed without causing 
Evade is opposed either by the trap’s Potency or its original Impaled . 

further damage to the victim. 
designer’s skill rating at the time the trap was made or set. 

As long as the unconsciousness is not the result of 

EVvaADdIinNgG aA HAaRrMmFfUuLl SPpEeLlLl Unconsciousness poisons or narcotics then the injured party is restored 

Opposed by the spell caster’s score in the casting skill. to awareness. 

Minor Wound Treatment restores 1d3 hit points to the injury. 

MAaNnOoEeUuVvEeRrIinNGg iInN COoMmBbAaTt Sterttesms WWissmord] Treatment restores the location to partial 
erious Woun . 

Opposed by the attacker’s Evade skill. functionality. 

A successful First Aid roll on a location suffering 

Again, like Endurance, Evade is most often used in Opposed from a Major Wound does not return any Hit Points, 

Tests. When used as a standard test, a critical Evade roll ensures . i nor restore functionality; but it does stabilize the 
Major Wound i i i 

that the evader retains some form of advantage or composure after- area, and prevent immediate death resulting from 

wards, such as avoiding all damage or slipping completely clear of the damage. More skilled healing is required to treat 

further danger. Major Wounds. 

41



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

application is known. An injury that has had a previous form of First LocaLle (IINNT x2) 
Aid applied cannot benefit from First Aid again, whether successful 

Locale measures a character’s understanding of local flora, 
or not, until it has fully healed. 

fauna, terrain, and weather in the area where he has spent the major- 
First Aid relies on having appropriate equipment — bandages, at 

ity of his life, usually within his community. The character knows the 
the very least — available for the treatment. These can be improvised 

common plants, trees and animals, their properties and behaviour: 
(a torn cloak to make a bandage or sling, for example) if necessary. 

where the best fish can be found; the movements of game creatures; 
A eritical First Aid improves the result of the treatment. On a Minor Injury 

where to find shelter; the likely weather for the season, and the most 
at recovers 1d6 Hit Points, on a Serious Injury it recovers 1d3 Hit Ponts, and 

common regional dangers. In neighbouring, yet unfamiliar locations 
on a Major Injury it restores partial functionality (if possible), and permats it 

Locale should be made one or more grades harder. 
to heal naturally. 

A critical success guarantees the character finds what he s looking for in 
A fumbled Furst Aid attempt causes more harm than good: the injured location 

abundance or knows precisely what something 1s. Subsequent skill rolls related 
suffers a_further 1 point of damage, potentially increasing the severity of the 
injury. lo the subject of that Locale roll (Survival, for instance, or Track) become one 

grade easuer: 
A farlure implies too little evidence to unambiguously dentify or predict, or 

InNfFlLuUeEnNCcEe (CCHHA x2) that whatever is being searchedf or cannot be_found. 
Influence measures a character’s ability to persuade others. It is A fumble means the information needed is not just unobtainable but utterly 

used in a wide variety of situations; from changing someone’s mind, misunderstood. Subsequent skill rolls dependent on that use of Locale become one 
through to bribing an official or guard. grade harder: 

Influence rolls are typically opposed by the Perception, Will- 
power or another Influence skill, depending on the circumstances, NAaTtIiVvEe ToONnGgUuEe (IINNTT++CCHA)) 
and are modified by how much a character is trying to influence 

Native Tongue is the ability to speak one’s own language, the 
behaviour. Attempting to persuade a close friend to loan you their 

one learned whilst growing up in one’s home culture. It measures 
horse may be relatively easy. Getting a usually incorruptible bureau- 

articulation, eloquence, and the depth of the speaker’s vocabulary. 
crat to accept a bribe is more difficult. 

Unlike other skills, Native Tongue is not rolled against directly. 
A critical success indicates that the character has been incredibly persuasive, 

Instead it is treated as a static representation of overall fluency, limit- 
s0 much so that not only s the character successful in what he is trying to attain 

ing the level of conversational interaction. This is described in more 
but his next Influence test with the same person, no matler when it lakes place, 

detail under the Language skill on page 47, but starting characters 
is one grade easier than the circumstances would normally dictate (A Standard 

usually begin play fully fluent in their mother tongue. 
r0ll becomes an Easy roll, for example, or a Hard roll becomes a Standard one). 

The skill can be used in two ways. Firstly it can help to under- 
A failure merely means that the persuasion was refused, with no subsequent 

stand dialects of neighbouring peoples which share a common lin- 
ussues. 

guistic basis or origin. In such cases the skill is treated at least one 
On a_fumble not only does the Influence roll faul; it also insults or offends 

grade harder, potentially affecting the character’s fluency. Secondly, 
the person being influenced. The specific reaction depends on the individual and 

it can be used as a cap on verbal skills which require a good grasp of 
the situation. 1t also means that_further Influence attempts with this individual 

language. See Capping Skills on page 50. 
become one difficully grade harder. 

InNsSiIgGhHTt (IINNTT++PPOOW)) PEeRrCcEePpTtiIoOnN (IINNTT++PPOOW)) 
Perception is used for both passive observation and focussed 

Insight is the ability to read or intuitively define another’s verbal 
detection; whether hunting for something specific, a general scan 

and non-verbal behaviour (such as body language or the manner of 
of an area or simple awareness of their surroundings. Specific con- 

speech) to establish their motives and state of mind. Insight is used 
ditions — darkness, for example — may affect the difficulty grade 

to determine if someone is telling a lie (and it can be opposed by the 
of the skill roll depending on the primary senses being utilised. 

other person’s Deceit skill), or to predict how someone feels about 
Strong scents might make an olfactory Perception roll Easy rather 

a particular situation. Insight can equally be applied to particular 
than Standard, whereas trying to eavesdrop on a conversation in a 

situations as well as other people: is that tavern a haven for trouble? 
crowded and noisy tavern would make the roll Hard. 

Could the bandits be planning an ambush in the nearby hills? 
A critical Perception roll reveals things that otherwise would not have been 

On a critical success the Insightful character gains an in-depth understanding 
detected in addition to that which the roll was being usedf or. 

of the other person’s current motives, thoughts and feelings. Using either Decert 
Failure indicates nothang in particular was discerned. 

or Influence against that person in a subsequent 1ol is one grade easier than 
Fumbling a Perception roll means that even the most blatantly obvious things 

circumstances would dictate (Easy rather than Standard; Standard rather than 
are overlooked or masconstrued, potentially increasing the difficulty of subsequent 

Hard, for example). 
skall checks. For instance, a_fumbled Perception roll when trying lo spot a trap 

A failure simply means the character cannot discern anything specific at that 
maght make an Evade roll Hard or even Formidable rather than Standard. 

time. On a_fumble, the character completely misjudges the person’s motives and 
actions. The Games Master should offer the character a series of private, deliber- 
ately misleading hints regarding the person’s motivations and likely actions. It also 
makes consequent Deceit and Influence rolls one difficulty grade harder: 

42



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

RiidDe (DDEXX+PPOOW)) 
Ride covers the ability to control and remain mounted on those 

creatures that are trained to be ridden. The skill can be applied to 
a diverse range of beasts, everything from mules to elephants; even 
flying or swimming creatures such as giant eagles or dolphins. 

Riding an unfamiliar species is always one difficulty grade 
harder; whilst riding a species of a different medium (a horseman 
riding a dragon, for example) is two grades harder. Wild, untamed 
creatures cannot be ridden in a constructive manner until they have 
been broken and trained to be riding beasts. 

A critical Ride result allows the rider to perform a feat of flamboyant riding 
(such as a jump or wingover) or temporarily increase his mount’s Movement by 
one tenth. 

A failure causes the mount to drop a level off atigue. 
A fumbled r0ll means that an accident occurs; either lo the rider (who might 

Jall off) or the mount whom suffers some_ form of injury, going lame or breaking 
one of uls limbsfor example. 

SIinNgG (PPOOWW+CHAA)) 
Carrying a tune is covered by Sing, anything from monotonous 

chants through to complex arias. Singing is an inherent part of 
most cultures, a prime source of entertainment, and perhaps used 
in its rituals. Important songs might be used for courting, inspiring 
soldiers before battle, or simply recounting a historical deed. The 
skill reflects the user’s ability to maintain rhythm, keep in key and 
remember the correct words. 

A critical Sing success can have one of several effects. If singing to earn 
money, increase by half again the amount earned due to the audience’s apprecia- 
tion of the performance. If being used to impress someone, a follow-up Influence time. Higher Swim percentages indicate being able to negotiate 
or similar skill become one difficulty grade easier to make. deeper and stronger waters, with less risk of drowning. Making a 

A failed Sing roll signifies a bland performance. Iff umbled, then the song was Swim roll therefore depends entirely on the conditions. Rough seas, 
off-key, out of tune, and poorly recewed. Halve the earnings and any attempts to strong currents, white water and rip-tides all reduce the grade of 
influence or deceive afterwards become one grade harder. the skill no matter what the character’s affinity for water might be. 

Under normal conditions a character’s maximum swimming speed 

STteaALltThH (DDEX+INT)) per round is equal to their base Movement rate, plus an extra metre 

Hiding out of plain sight, or moving with minimal sound are for every full 20% they possess in Swim. 

covered by the Stealth skill. Cover and conditions, such as darkness A critical Swim roll allows the character to add a further metre to hus Move- 

or loud background noise, improve the grade of the skill according ment rate. 

to specifics of the environment. Similarly adverse conditions, such Failing a Swim 10ll has no immediate consequences, save that the character 

as a lack of cover or a quiet night will decrease the skill’s grade. Cir- gains a level of Fatigue. 

cumstances also affect the difficulty of the attempt. For instance, a If a Swim roll is_fumbled then controlled movement ceases as the swimmer 

warrior wearing heavy armour can easily conceal themselves behind begins suffering cramps or is overwhelmed by turbulent conditions; future Swim 

a wall providing they stand still or move very slowly, whereas moving 10lls become one grade more difficult. From that moment on, all the swimmer 

quickly might cause their armour to jingle. can do s try to keep their head above water until help arrives or they become 

A critical roll means that any subsequent attempts lo use skills to locate the exhausted, at which point they’ll likely start to drown. See the rules for Asphyx- 

character; follow lam, observe him, and so_forth are one grade harder. tation on page 71. 

A failure indicates that they are blatantly obvious, providing someone is both- 
ering to locate them. UNnAaRrMmEeDd (SSTTRR+DEX)) 

On a_fumble the Stealth attempt has backfired and signals the character’s Unarmed is a universal Combat Style common to all characters, 
presence rather than disguises it, or causes them to suffer some accident or mas- measuring the ability to defend oneself without the aid of weapons. 
Jortune; such as hiding on a window ledge then being knocked off when someone The Unarmed skill covers the brawling and wrestling techniques 
opens the shutter to investigate the strange noise. known by that culture. However there are, of course, specific styles 

that enhance the ability to fight without weapons, offering advan- 

Swim (SSTTRR++CCOON)) tages to those who learn them as a separate Combat Style. 

Without development the ability to swim is limited to being able As Unarmed is a Combat Style its critical and fumble effects are 

to thrash around, and keep one’s head above the water for a short covered by the rules for combat, as detailed in the Combat chapter. 

43



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

WiiLlLlpPoOwWEeRr (PPOOWW x2) perform convincingly: on stage, for example, or attempting to pass 
oneself off as another person. 

Willpower is a measure of a character’s ability to concentrate, 
A critical success us thoroughly convincing. In a performance context it guar- 

channel his force of will in a particular direction, or harden his psy- 
antees a standing ovation or similar. In a social context then the actor is the 

che to possible mental shock. Itis also a measure of personal resolve. 
character ke portrays. It also means that any subsequent skill roll, such as Deceit, 

The skill is used in all manner of situations where mental resilience 
Influence or similay, s one difficulty grade easier (Easy rather than Standard, 

is required, and this includes resisting magic. Although not a mea- 
Jor example). 

sure of sanity it can be used to endure traumatic events that would 
Failed rolls signify a lacklustre performance. 

shake even the sanest, stable mind. Willpower is the mental counter- 
Fumbling an Acting roll means the performance convinces no-one, and is so 

part to Endurance. 
bad that even the most unperceptive will see through the act, or perhaps worse, 

Again, like Endurance and Evade, Willpower is most often used 
laugh andj eer. 

in Opposed Tests. When used as a standard test, a critical Willpower 
roll indicates that the character has hardened his mind and spirit to 
the extent that no further attempts to influence him, or shake his AccrroosbaaTtiics (SSTTRR+DEX)) 
resolve, will work. In the case of resisting magic, a critical success Acrobatics covers acts of balance, gymnastics, juggling and tum- 

means that no further mentally afflicting spells cast by the opponent bling. The skill can be used in its own right as a way to impress 

have any effect on the character for the remainder of that encounter. an audience, but also to help mitigate damage from falls. With a 

The effects of failing a Willpower roll depend on the situation successful roll a character can move at full speed and sure-footedly 

and circumstances — usually temporary capitulation to whatever is across an unstable or narrow surface. If trying to mitigate damage 

being done to him. A fumbled Willpower roll means that the charac- from an unexpected fall, a successful Acrobatics reduces the distance 

ter is utterly overwhelmed. His will is broken, and he has no means as explained on page 78, Falling. 

of resisting whatever it is that assails him mentally or spiritually. In Acrobatics can be substituted for Evade if the situation warrants 

the case of resisting shock or spells a fumbled Willpower roll means it. The benefit of this is that if the roll is a success, the character 

that the psychological effect of the spell becomes permanent until automatically avoids ending up prone. 

healed. A critical success doubles the movement rate when balancing or negotiating 
an unstable surface. 

Failing an Acrobatics roll results in an unimpressed audience, or the prema- 
OppPtTiIoOnNaALl RUuLlEe –— LimIiTtSs tToO ture aborting of whatever trick or tumble was attempted. 

EnNDdUuRrAaNnCcEe AanNDd WIiLlLlpPoOwWEeRr A fumbled Acrobatics roll means that balance and agility has been completely 
There are limuts to mental, and physical endurance; barrers beyond lost, causing the character to eitherfall off whatever he was balancing upon, drop 

which the mind, and body cannot be pushed, and surrender becomes inevi- a juggled object in a spectacularly bad way, or injure themselves performing an 
table. Games Masters may wish to rule in therr campaign that Endurance acrobatic tumble — suffering 1d4 points of damage to a random location. 
cannot exceed CON x5, and Willpower cannot exceed POW x5. The 
starting values for each skill are both calculated as normal, but have a ARrTt (PPOOWW+CHAA)) 
defined limat. 

There are many specific art forms. Painting to Poetry; Literature 

N 4 to Sculpture. A character chooses an Art specialisation when taking 
this skill. Subsequent Art forms are advanced in separately. A roll is 
made whenever a character must impress or convince through his 

P artistic medium. 
RrOoFfEeSsSsiIoOnNAaLl SKkIiLlLlSs A critical success inducates that artist creates something of stunming quality, 
Professional Skills differ between characters and represent more elegance or beauty — worth half the standard value again of like products. Any 

specialised forms of training and experience. Some Professional subsequent skill rolls made to influence whomever commissioned the work, or those 
skills are gathered through cultural background and a character’s that simply admare it, become temporarily one grade easier. 
career, as the name suggests. Although they differ between charac- Failing the roll creates something insipid, which neither impresses or sells _for 
ters they work in the same way as Standard Skills. more than the materials used to create ut. 

Certain magical skills are also classed as Professional Skills: Invo- A fumbled Art roll renders an artistic disaster. The effects of such a terrible 
cation and Shaping are the two skills associated with Sorcery for sttuation need to be determined by the Games Master but, at the very least, rep- 
example. These are only briefly described here. For more details see resent a complete waste of lime, materials, and talent that, if viewed publicly, 

the relevant magical chapter. could influence reputation. 

AccTtIinNgG (CCHHA x2) BIinNdDIinNgG (PPOOWW+CHAA)) 
Acting governs the art of being able to impersonate and convey Binding is a magical skill used by animists to exert their will over 

a completely different character, whether in a staged performance spirits and creatures of the otherworld. It is used to bind spirits into 
or in a social situation. The actor portrays a personality and man- fetishes, and control their actions once bound. Additionally, it can be 
nerisms different to his own in a convincing manner. Coupled with used to summon and coerce a known spirit to perform a deed for a 
the Disguise and Deceit skills, this is a powerful way of becoming mutually acceptable service, forging a contract between them. 
someone else entirely. An Acting roll is needed when it is essential to 

44



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

Moreover the skill is used when engaging in Spirit Combat, and Failing a Courtesy roll means the user has not impressed the 
also measures the authority an animist has within a spirit cult. For company with his attitude or manners; making any subsequent skill 
further details see page 131 of the Animism chapter. rolls a grade harder. 

Binding is not limited to animists. The skill can be learned by A fumbled Courtesy roll creates severe embarrassment and 
other magical practitioners, and used in the binding of supernatural humiliation and, at worst, gives insult that, depending on the cir- 
entities such as elementals and demons. cumstances, could have a dire outcome. No further social inter- 

course 1s possible after a fumble. 

BUuRrEeAaUuCcRrAaCcYy (IINNT x2) 
Understanding administrative procedures, records, and unspo- CrrRaAfFtT (DDEX+INT)) 

ken conventions are covered by the Bureaucracy skill. It is used Each Craft is a specialised form, and there are as many crafts 
to interact with officials or discover pertinent civic information. as there are professions for them. Like Art, Craft is used to create 
Depending on the sophistication of their culture, bureaucrats need the subject item. How long it takes depends entirely on the nature 
not necessarily be literate. However their Bureaucracy skill cannot of the product: weaving a rug takes longer than throwing a pot, for 
exceed the score of the Language or Literacy skill in which they instance, but time is not necessarily the most important factor: it is 
work. Whenever red-tape or administrative landscapes need to be the skill of the crafter, the quality of the resources, and attention to 
navigated, a Bureaucracy roll is necessary. detail. 

Critically succeeding in Bureaucracy lends a deep insight into the procedures A critical success creates an tem of superior quality, in terms of durability, 
andf ormalities of whatever 1t is the character 1s attempting to accomplish, achzev- utility or beauty. 
ing it in half the usual time. It also means any subsequent skills relying on the A failed Craft roll indicates a sub-standard result undermining its robustness, 
Bureaucracy roll are one grade easter (Influence, for example, or Decent). Junction or aesthetics. 

A farlure resulls in becoming stonewalled or relevant documents misplaced, A fumbled roll creates an item that isfunctionally useless and valueless. Alter- 
the user’s inability lo follow customary procedure resulting in subsequent skills natwely an accident occurs during the crafling process, causing damage to prop- 
relevant to the situation becoming one grade harder. erty, stock or the crafter themselves; a pottery kiln collapsing or a smath striking hes 

1f the roll is_fumbled then access is_forbidden or the character alenates a key hand with a hammerf or example. 
personage — so that their enquiry or request will never be satisfied. 

CuurlTttuure (IINNT x2) 
CoMmMmEeRrCcEe (IINNTT++CCHA)) Culture is the more specific form of the Standard Skill of Cus- 

Commerce is used to evaluate the worth of goods and commod- toms, relating instead to societies foreign to the character’s own. 
ities, and to trade them for the best possible price. It is also used Each Culture skill must be given a particular nation or society to 
to understand the intricacies of business transactions in addition to which it applies. Mechanically it works in the same way as the Cus- 
securing a profit. A further use is in finding the best way to dispose toms skill. 
of stolen and illicit goods — again for the best possible price. Com- 
merce is obviously used when trading, and it can be opposed by DeevoTtionN (PPOOWW+CHAA)) 
either an opponent’s Commerce skill or Willpower, reflecting the 

Devotion is a magical skill which reflects the commitment of 
opposing side’s attempts to further the deal in their favour. It is also 

priests, and their ilk to the service of a deity or pantheon of gods. It 
used to judge the market value of goods, gaining an idea of price 

not only measures the depth of devotion to a deity, but also governs 
and where it will be best traded. 

the magnitude of any theistic miracles called upon by the theist, and 
In transactions where rolls are not opposed, a critical success allows the char- 

the recovery of these blessings at an appropriate holy place. 
acter to secure the commoduty or service at half its usual price, or sell itfor double. 

Additionally the skill can indicate the standing of a theist within a 
Failing the roll indicates that the commodity or service is secured at twice the 

religious cult. For further details see page 178 of the Theism chapter. 
price, or sold_for only half the value. 

In some settings Devotion is not limited to professional priests. 
A fumble means the character has insulted the purchaser or seller to such 

It may be adopted by those who simply wish to show respect to the 
a degree that the transaction s lost. Alternatively it may indicate that they are 

gods even if they do not actively practice Theism, or indeed if the 
cheated instead, ending up paying for something worthless or unwittingly selling 

gods exist at all! 
sometling of potentially great value at a_fraction of its cost. 

Also see the section on Haggling, page 56. 
Diiscguuiise (IINNTT++CCHA)) 

CouurrTteessy (IINNTT++CCHA)) Effecting a convincing disguise, using appropriate materials (cos- 
tumes, cosmetics, wigs or hairpieces), is covered by the Disguise skill. 

This skill covers understanding how to act appropriately in a 
Creating the disguise requires time and attention to detail, as well as 

social or formal situation: modes of address, rituals, and conven- 
access to the right materials to make it convincing. If some, or all, 

tions of behaviour, and so forth. It includes everything from who to 
of these elements are not present then the Disguise roll’s difficulty 

bow to, and when, to how low; from when to use a particular title, to 
grade is made one or more steps harder. 

when it is appropriate to act informally. 
Disguise can be augmented with Acting to enhance the overall 

Ciritically succeeding in a Courtesy roll makes any subsequent 
effect of a deception (vice versa when performing), and so the two 

skill roll relevant to that situation one difficulty grade easier. 
skills are complementary. 

45



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

A critical Disguise roll results in a completely convincing masquerade so GAaMmBbLlIinNGg (IINNTT++PPOOW)) 
potent that even their own mother or a lifelong enemy probably wouldn’t recognise 

The Gambling skill measures a character’s competence in games 
them. 

of chance, and especially where money is staked on the outcome. It 
Failing a disguise 1oll resulls in such a meagre attempt it permits passive 

is used to assess the odds of success or failure or spot when some- 
onlookers the chance to see through it. 

one is cheating. The skill can be used in an opposed or unopposed 
A fumbled Disguise roll either produces a disguise so crass that it instantly 

manner, depending on the situation. Spending the night in a face- 
penetrated; or one whichf ails at a spectacularly inopportune moment. No amount 

less gambling den might only require a straight test, whereas a high 
of great acting can salvage the illusion when a_false nose peels away or a poorly 

stakes dice game involving notable personages may instead require 
Satted costume rips off. 

several rounds of opposed rolls. 
A enitical Gambling success usually permats the character to win a game 

ENnGgIiNnEeEeRrIinNgG (IINNT x2) outright or clean out one of the participants. 
The design and building of large-scale structures, from houses Failure simply results in the character losing that hand or stake. 

to bridges, gates to siege engines, is in the remit of the Engineering On a_fumble, the character has completely misread the odds or has tragic bad 
skill. Rolls are necessary when planning large scale projects to ensure luck. He loses everything gambled and us thrown out of the game. 
correct construction, but are also made when an engineer wants to Cheating allows a character to roll twice and take the best 
assess a structure’s integrity for whatever reason (state of repair or result. However each time this is attempted the cheater must roll 
weak spots, for example). an opposed test of their Sleight skill against the Perception or Gam- 

A critical success lughlights any unnoticeable major flaws or problems with bling skill of everyone else playing. lailing to beat all the observers 
the item under study. It also makes subsequent rolls dependent on the structure one means that the cheater has been detected, with suitable results. 
grade easier. Alternately it may allow a lougher, more resilient construction to be 
bult (a tenth more Hit Points or Armour Points). 

Failing an Engineering roll resulls in a construction which s sub-standard Healuincg (IINNTT++PPOOW)) 
Healing is the in-depth knowledge of medical procedures, 

(a tenthfewer Hit Points or Armour Points) or an inability to determine any 
based on cultural practices. In a primitive or barbarian cul- 

structural information. 
ture, for instance, healing will be based on the 

A fumble actively introduces a majorflaw into a proj- 
ect or disastrously assesses the condition of an item, knowledge of herbs, and natural cures. In a 

civilised culture, drugs and more advanced 
providing incorrect and musleading information. Sub- 

treatments will be more common. In all 
sequent rolls dependent on the Engineering check are ‘e 

cultures Healing includes the ability to set 
made one grade harder. 

bones, suture wounds, and so forth. Obvi- 
ously applying healing requires appropriate 

ExXhHOoRrTt resources, and most practicing healers will 

(IINNTT++CCHA)) o have such things to hand (needles, gut or 
thread for sutures, herbs for poultices, and so 

Exhort is the magical skill used 
forth). There are three main areas of Healing: 

to call upon and channel the power 
of the gods. It includes knowledge i TRrEeAaTtIinNgG SEerRIioOuUSs WOoUuNnDdSs 
of the history, myths, rituals, practices, \ A successful Healing roll restores 1d3 Hit 
prayers, and powers of the god or pantheon, Points to a Seriously Injured locaton. On a criti- 
and is essential to Theistic magic, being used to cal success this is raised to 1d3+1. If fumbled, damage is 
manifest divine miracles. For further details see page increased by 1 Hit Point. 
178-179 of the Theism chapter. 

TRrEeAaTtIinNgG DIiSsEeAaSsEeSs 
FoLlk MAaGgIic AanNDd PoOiIssoOnNs 

If Healing is performed 

(PPOOWW+CHAA)) prior to the onset time, it coun- 

Minor, petty magics teracts the disease or toxin 
are cast using this skill. It entirely, providing it over- 
represents  the character’s comes the Potency of the 

knowledge  of charms, malady in an opposed roll. 
cantrips or blessings, and If performed on a character 
how competent the user is who has already succumbed 
when casting them. For further to the disease or toxin, a suc- 
details see page 122 of the Folk cessful Healing roll permits the 

Magic chapter. vicim a new chance to resist, 
making it one grade easier. A critical 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

success increases it by two grades. A fumble however, makes the Litreerraacy (IINNT x2) 
resistance roll one grade harder. 

Speaking a language fluently does not mean one can read and 

SuURrGgEeRrYy write it. Literacy is a specific skill, and different cultures and societies 

Surgery is the only way, other than magical healing, that a char- display different levels and approaches towards it. In some, literacy 

acter can recover from a Major Wound. A successful First Aid roll is reserved for the nobility, bureaucratic or religious classes. In others 

is needed to stabilise a Major Wound (see the First Aid skill on page it is unknown with oral traditions prevailing instead. 

41), and then a Healing roll can be made to set a shattered bone, Naturally Literacy is specialised according to its associated lan- 

stitch together the flesh of a stump or excise foreign objects lodged guage, including Native Tongue. Before once can be literate in a 

in tissue, so that the location can begin the road to recovery. Language one must be able to speak it. Literacy cannot exceed the 

As long as the Healing roll is a success, the injured location character’s related Language skill. The skill works similarly to Lan- 

begins to heal as normal for a location suffering a Major Wound (see guage in terms of how much of a document can be comprehended. 

Healing on page 80). On a critical success the location regains 1 Hit Literacy does not necessarily imply writing, as there are an 

Point immediately; whereas on a fumbled Healing roll the patient infinite number of ways to record information. Some cultures might 

must succeed in a Endurance roll or die from the procedure. Surgery carve symbols into trees or lengths of bone, whereas others record 

cannot re-attach a severed limb. history in complex patterns of knots in a tapestry. Neither are all 
forms of literacy based on phonetic alphabets; hieroglyphs and ideo- 

InNvoOCcAaTtIioOnN (IINNT x2) grams also being commonplace. 

Invocation is a magical skill essential to Sorcery. Itis the sorcerer’s 
ability to successfully cast spells learned from a particular grimoire LockkrpiickinNgG (DDEX x2) 
or mentor. It is a combination of understanding the formulae of the Lockpicking is the ability to open a mechanical locking system 

spell, the correct mental state, accompanying gestures and incanta- without the aid of a key or other device made specifically for the 

tions, and so on. Increasing competence in this skill also improves lock. It includes the techniques of levering open bolted or barred 

the final intensity of the spells cast with it. doors and windows without causing damage. The difficulty of the 

Each Invocation skill must be tied to a specific source of sorcer- lock usually depends on the ability of the locksmith who created it, 

ous knowledge, whether that be a particular spellbook, school of requiring an opposed test of Lockpicking versus Mechanisms skill 

wizardry or even a demonic patron. For further details see page 161 of the crafter. 

of the Sorcery chapter. Where no skill value is provided for the lock a Games Master 
may adjust the difficulty grade of the Lockpicking skill instead, 

LaAnNGgUuAaGgEe (IINNTT++CCHA)) according to the lock’s complexity. A thief attempting to pick an 
expensive and expertly crafted mechanical doorlock of a kind he 

This skill covers the speaking and comprehension of languages 
has never seen before, might have to make his Lockpick roll one or 

other than the character’s own. Akin to Native Tongue (see page 
two grades harder, for example. And some locks — invisible, recessed 

42), the Language skill is not rolled against directly, but is treated 
bolts and deadlocks — might be impossible to pick. 

as a static representation of overall fluency. Its value is used by the On a critical success the Lockpicker not only opens the lock silently and effi- 
Games Master to limit the level of spoken interaction when the play- ciently, but subsequent attempt to pick the same kind of lock becomes, for a short 
ers converse with personalities in the game. Use the Linguistic Flu- while, one grade easter. 
ency table as a guideline. A failure simply means the lock could not be picked. 

On a_fumble the lock becomes jammed: lockpicks break in the mechanism, or 
LinNngGuistTic FlLuUeEnNCcYy 

the mechanism s damaged internally. Whatever the cause, the jammed lock wall 
Language % Conversational Fluency 

ultimately attract attention. 
01-25% Knows only a few simple words, cannot phrase sentences 

26-50% Can understand and communicate in fragmentary, simple 
- 0 Lore (IINNT x2) 

sentences, such as “Where temple?” or “How much food? 
Lore covers a specific body of knowledge which must be chosen 

51-75% Fluent enough for general conversation 
when the skill is first learned. Astrology, Astronomy, Geography, His- 

Able to express yourself with eloquence 
76% + tory, Monsters, Mythology, Politics, Strategy and Tactics: these are 

all typical examples of Lore skills. Skill in a Lore means the charac- 
ter understands its fundamentals, how it can be applied to immedi- 

Each Language skill is specific to a particular national or regional 
ate challenges and problems, and can use the Lore to recall useful 

language which must be chosen at the time of learning. It can help to 
information. 

understand similar dialects which share a common linguistic basis or 
A eritical Lore success grants a high degree of insight into what is being 

origin. Depending on the divergence, the skill roll should be treated 
studied. It also means that a subsequent skill roll relevant to that Lore becomes one 

at least one grade harder, possibly reducing the character’s fluency. 
grade easier. For example, a commanding officer who critically succeeds in a Lore 

Language is also used as a cap on verbal skills which require a 
(Politics) roll knows that not only 1s the approaching troupe part of a diplomatic 

good grasp of language. See Capping Skills on page 50. 
envoy, but they are mercenaries unhappy with their situation. If he later tries to 
influence the mercenaries to change sides his roll would become one step easter. 

Failing a Lore roll results in no useful information being gained. 

47



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

A fumbled Lore roll indicates a complete misunderstanding of the subject. A critical success indicates the musician creates music of stunning quality, 
Facts are wrong, and subsequent skill rolls dependent on the Lore skill’s accuracy elegance or beauty. Any subsequent skill rolls, such as Influence, become one grade 
become one grade more difficult. easter. 

Failing a Musicianship roll renders in a lacklustre performance. A _fumbled 

MEechHAaNnIisSmMSs (DDEX+INT)) Muswianship roll resulls in a musical disaster. Perhaps the instrument breaks 
or the prece of music performed is taken as a gross insull. The effects of such a 

Mechanisms represents the knowledge and skill to assemble and 
lerrible situation need to be determined by the Games Master but, at the very least, 

disassemble mechanical devices, such as traps. The skill of Mecha- 
represent embarrassment that could influence reputation. 

nisms generally involves the creation of delicate contraptions with 
small working parts, as opposed to Engineering, which deals with 
massive constructions. It is a distinct discipline from Lockpicking MyyssTtiicismm (PPOOWW+CON)) 
and cannot be interchanged with that skill. Mysticism is a magical skill essential to Mystics. It measures their 

The time taken to deal with a mechanism depends entirely on facility to perform superhuman acts through the channelling of 
its scale and complexity. Repairing a large cartwheel might take inner resources, and either harnessing or suppressing certain pas- 
half an hour; whilst building a poison-needle trapped lock might sions or concepts. As competence in this skill improves, so does the 
take an entire week. When deciding on how long a Mechanism skill mystic gradually approach perfection in those skills which are the 
attempt should take, Games Masters need to consider the size, intri- focus of his training. 
cacy, tools needed, and any specific conditions. As a rule of thumb, Each Mysticism skill must be tied to a specific foundation of 
Mechanisms rolls take a minimum of 1d3x10 minutes but this is for mystical knowledge. This can be a religious sect, a book of esoteric 
simplest and most straightforward of mechanical challenges. The teachings or perhaps a mountain-top residing hermit. The skill is 
timeframe may very well extend to months. more fully described in the Mysticism chapter on page 155. 

On a critical success the character achieves success i half the usual time, 
and withf lawless results. Any future rolls attempting lo disable or circumvent the NAaVvIiGgAaTtIioOnN (IINNTT++PPOOW)) 
Mechanisms are one grade harder. 

Whether using prominent landmarks, the stars or the varying 
A falure resulls in a device which is temperamental and prone to breaking 

taste of seawater, the ability to accurately direct travel is covered by 
down; attempts to bypass or render it inoperative are one grade easier. 

the Navigation skill. Each Navigation skill covers a specific region 
On afumble the mechanism is utterly broken, and has to be thrown away and 

or environment, such as Open Seas or Underground for example. 
started againfrom scratch. 

It should be made during unusual journeys or when in completely 
unfamiliar territory. 

MEeDdIitTaAtTiIoOnN (IINNTT++CCOON)) A critical success in Navigation allows the user to locate a shorteut, such as 
Meditation is the ability to reach a state of deep relaxation and a fast current or hidden pass. 

concentration, through emptying the consciousness of all distrac- Failing the roll results in delays due to uncertainty or temporarily losing the 
tions: external and internal. Technically a magical skill, it is a fun- path. 
damental part of Mysticism controlling the depth of focus needed A fumbled Navigation ends up with the user becoming utterly lost, unable to 
when augmenting skills to superhuman levels. As competence in even backtrack. 
Meditation improves, the more potent a mystic’s abilities become. 

Being a useful skill, Meditation need not be limited to just mys- ORrAaTtOoRrYy (PPOOWW+CHAA)) 
tics. Since it helps to shut out distractions and relaxes the body, it 

Oratory is the art of delivering a speech to large group of people 
allows the user to achieve rest even in the most uncomfortable of 

with the aim of conveying or swaying a point of view. It is a skill 
locations. A successful roll permits a character to recover Fatigue or 

frequently used by politicians to drive home a policy, but is also used 
Hit Points in situations normally forbidden by the rules. 

by commanders to inspire troops, and impose discipline on the bat- 
tlefield. Wherever mass persuasion is needed, Oratory, rather than 

MuusisicciiaNnssHhIiPp (DDEX+CHA)) Influence, is used. 
Musicianship covers the playing of musical instruments; from a On a critical Oratory roll the orator sways the group completely to his argu- 

simple reed pipe to a complex stringed instrument such as a harp. ment, even winning over the most ardent of detractors. Subsequent rolls related to 
Each iteration of Musicianship is applied to a group of similar the Oratory are one difficulty grade easer. 
instruments. A musician who can play a reed pipe can also play a A failed Oratory roll goes nowhere; people are as dispassionate or hostile as 
flute, panpipes or a recorder because the fundamentals are the same. before. 
He could not, however, play a harp or lute. On a_fumble, the orator has alienated his audience, perhaps made himself 

The chief groups of instruments are: look foolish, and may even have managed to compel the audience to believe the 
opposite of what he wanted to convey. Subsequent rolls dependent on the Oratory 

& Bow Strings (violin, cello, fiddle, and so on) 
become one grade harder. 

« Keyboards (piano, organ, clavinet, and so on) 
& Percussion (drums, tom-toms, and so on) 
& Plucked Strings (harp, lyre) SeEaAmMAaNnSsHhIiPp (IINNTT++CCOON)) 
& Strummed Strings (lute, guitar, banjo etc) This skill is used in exactly the same way as Boating (see page 39) 

& Wind (pipe, flute, trumpet, and so on) but is instead applied to large waterborne vessels powered by sail or 
banks of oars. It also covers the maintenance and upkeep of a ship: 

48



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

assessing when repairs are needed, where it is safe to anchor, the Failing a Streetwise attempt merely results in wasting the time spent looking. 
dangers of violent weather, and so forth. A fumbled Streetwise means the character not only fauls to find what is being 

sought, but also comes under unwanted, potentially dangerous attention: from 

SedpucTtionN (IINNTT++CCHA)) local thugs or muggers to the resident militia, depending on curcumstances. 

Seduction is the romantic or sexual persuasion of another per- 
son, a skill very different to Influence. It uses explicit signals — verbal SurviivaLl (CCOON+POW)) 
and non-verbal — to elicit a sexually positive response. It also takes This skill covers surviving in a rural or wilderness environment 
a significant amount of time: successful Seduction may take hours, where the benefits of civilisation are absent: foraging, building a fire, 
days or weeks to achieve depending on the morals of the target, finding shelter or a safe place to sleep. When properly equipped rolls 
who always has the opportunity to resist a Seduction attempt with are usually unnecessary since the character may be carrying a tent, 
Willpower. food supplies, and so on. Only when separated from their equip- 

A critical Seduction rollyields a potent result, entrancing the victim or causing ment or when environmental conditions turn bad does it become 
them to_fall passionately in love (or lust). Subsequent skill rolls taking advantage essential to utilise this skill. A roll is usually made once per day in 
of this relationshup become one grade easier. such conditions. 

A failed Seduction leads to the seducer being rebuffed to some degree. A critical success indicates that the character locates a good source of food or 
A fumble ends up causing emotional hurt or insulting the target. This com- shelter, and does not need to make a_further Survwal rollfor a number of days 

Dletely ruins any further chances of seduction for the time being; it also makes equal to the critical range of his skill (one-tenth). 
subsequent skill rolls one grade harder. A disastrous Seduction attempt can lead to Farlure results in the character gaining an automatic level off atigue that does 
intensely grave consequences. not lift until conditions change or the next Survival roll is made. A_fumbled Sur- 

vwal roll ends up with a disastrous accident of some kind; encountering a_fierce 

ShHAaPpIinNgG (IINNTT++PPOOW)) creature, suffering exposure or consuming poisonous. food_for example. 

Shaping is a magical skill that is the counterpart to Invocation. 
Successfully invoked spells can be manipulated or shaped by the sor- TeachH (IINNTT++CCHA)) 
cerer to meet specific requirements; extending their range, adding Teach allows the user to pass on their knowledge and techniques 
multiple targets, increasing duration, and so on. The Sorcery chap- in an easy to understand and constructive manner. Without this skill 
ter on page 161-162 defines how Shaping works in detail. even the most capable of masters will suffer problems instructing 

others. Similarly to certain other skills, Teach is not rolled against 

SLleEiIgGhHTt (DDEX+CHA)) directly, but acts as a limit to what actually can be taught to more 
advanced students. For further details see Training on page 73. 

Sleight covers attempts to palm or conceal small objects (leger- 
demain and prestidigitation), and includes attempts to pick pockets, 
cut purses or cause a visual distraction. Naturally it is an essential GEeNnEeRrAaLl VvSs.. SPpEeCcIiFfIicC TEeaAcChHIinNgG 
thieves’ skill. Depending on the amount of complexity Games Masters wish to intro- 

Characters can attempt to manipulate any item as long as it is due, teachers may specialise in a particular area or range of subjects. 

no larger than their hand. Sleight can be attempted with living crea- For example, Kara’s philosophy teacher specialises in Teach (Meerish 
tures provided that the user has somewhere or something to conceal Philosophy). This covers the teachings of the great Meerish philosophers, 

them with, a hat or baggy sleeve for example, but the skill becomes lastorians, and cult prests. 

one grade harder to perform. Some objects, due to their size and 1If treated in this way Teach can_function almost as a Combat Style, 

mass cannot be manipulated with Sleight at all but require Con- encompassing several different skills or areas of study. A thieves’ cult might 

ceal instead. Observers can pit their Perception skill against Sleight employ teachers who wnstruct in the related arts of Disguise, Stealth, and 

attempts to become aware of the deception. Sleight, under the Teach (The Hidden Path) skill. 

On a critical Sleight success the character has manipulated the object so suc- Culls frequently employ teachers who train therr members in specific 

cessfully that any subsequent attempts to locate it are one grade harder: cult skills (see page 199 of the Cults and Brotherhoods chapter). 
N f 

Failure means that the object ts not concealed, and will be automatically 
detected 1f any effort 1s made to locate ut. 

If fumbled, not only is the item unconcealed, but it is dropped or otherwise 
Jully exposed at a most inopportune moment. 

TrRaAcCkK (IINNTT++CCOON)) 
STtRreeTtwIiSsEe (PPOOWW+CHAA)) The Track skill is used for tracking any form of game or quarry. 

Streetwise represents knowledge of places and social contacts It uses both obvious and ambiguous signs of passing to remain on 
within a settlement. It covers everything from identifying potentially the quarry’s trail, including footprints, bruised leaves, scattered pol- 
dangerous neighbourhoods, to finding local services — legal or ille- len, displaced rocks, and so on; small, tell-tale signs that are invisible 
gal. How long a Streetwise attempt takes depends on what is sought. to the non-skilled. Track rolls need to be made periodically, espe- 
Finding a good inn will take less time than locating a fence for stolen cially if conditions change abruptly (a rain shower, for example, 
goods or a fake trading permit. will disturb certain signs). How often depends on how cunning the 

A critical Streetwise success locates the precise person or place necessary to quarry has been. Conceal rolls can be used to oppose a Track roll. 
gain what he is seeking for, without unnecessary bribes or intermediary steps, 
which can result in theformation of a new contact. 

49



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

With a critical success the tracker remains on the trail of someone or some- unaugmented; so Anathaym would still only score a Critical 
thing not attempting to hide their spooy; wrrespectwe of conditions, and does not success on a roll of 4% or less. 
need to make any subsequent Track rolls to locate the quarry. & Characters can augment other character’s skills to assist them. 

Failing causes the tracker to lose the trail, forcing them to backtrack in order All the above rules apply, so a character being aided cannot 
to pick it up again. augment himself in addition. Likewise a character can only 

Fumbling a Track roll loses the trail utterly, forcing the user to abandon the contribute one of his skills to assist another. So, for example, 
pursuat or hunt. Alternately the tracker may wander blithely into a prepared trap Anathaym, trying to scale a high wall, could have her Athlet- 
laid by the stalked victim. ics skill augmented by a companion’s Brawn (representing a 

hitch-up). 

TRrAaNnCcEe (PPOOWW+CON)) 
Trance is a magical skill used by practitioners of Animism to CAaPpPpIinNgG SKkIiLlLlSs 

attain the correct psychological state that permits the perception of, 
To ‘cap’ a skill with another means that for a particular roll, the 

and transition into, the Spirit World. Further detail on how Trance 
primary skill is restricted to the value of a secondary skill, providing 

works 1§ given in the Animism chapter beginning on page 130. 
the latter is lower. This is normally done in situations where a char- 
acter’s full knowledge or ability is limited by unusual circumstances. 

Capping is a useful alternative to applying a difficulty modifier, 

DIiFfFfeErReEnNTt SIitTuUaAtTiIoOnNSs especially in circumstances where the character is limited by their 

Although the basic rules for using skills in MYTHRAS are very own capability. 

straightforward, there are a multitude of different circumstances 
that arise during play that require skills to be handled in a slightly ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
different way. The following sections look at these circumstances and Anathaym has a Lore (Strategy, and Tactics) skill of 48% which she 

situations, and show how to handle them. normally rolls without penally when organising battle plans with her native 
Meerish compatriots. Travelling across the plains of Korath however she us 

REeAaTtTtEemMPpTtIinNgG SKkIiLlLlSs Jorced to use the local language with her hired nomadic bodyguards, in which 
she if ar lessfluent, knowing only afew basic words — Language (Korathian) 

In some situations a character will fail a skill attempt but be left 
23%. Spotting an approaching enemy patrol of Zingriffi raiders, Anathaym 

in a situation where he could potentially try again. Example cases 
attempls lo organise her nomads to lay an ambush. In this circumstance the 

might be picking a lock or attempting to climb a sheer wall. Instead 
Games Master rules that her halting command of the local language will 

of simply denying any further attempts, kindly Games Masters may 
prevent Anathaym from being able to clearly explain her plan; capping her 

permit a follow-up, last-ditch attempt. However, the character will 
Lore (Strategy, and ‘Tactics) skill to the value of her Language (Korathian). 

suffer some trepidation or lack of confidence which increases the 
difficulty of the skill roll by one grade. 

If this second effort also ends in failure, the character is assumed 
to have given it his ‘best shot’, and cannot make any further attempts 
for the foreseeable future. COoNnTtEeSsTtEedD ROoLlLlSs 

Contested Rolls are used whenever a skill is actively resisted by 
AUuGgMmEeNnTtIinNGg SKkIiLlLlSs an opponent. This can be anything from a character influencing a 

It is possible for one skill to aid another. This is called Augmenting. reticent guard to a sorcerer casting a spell against a monster. There 
Anathaym, for example, may find herself being chased by nomad are two types of contest: Opposed Rolls and Dfferential Rolls. 
raiders through countryside she knows well, and they do not. She 
could, in this case, augment her Drive with her Locale skill, knowl- OppproOsedD RoolLlLls 
edge of the local terrain giving her an advantage. MyTHRAS frequently pits one skill against another — Stealth ver- 

The Games Master will decide if augmentation is appropri- sus Perception when a thief attempts to cut a nobleman’s purse, 

ate and possible. Any skill being used to augment another must be say; or Deceit versus Insight when the same thief tries to deny the 

appropriate to the circumstances. In Anathaym’s example Locale attempt when he is caught —are good examples of times where skills 

is appropriate because she knows the area. If she was in unfamiliar are matched against each other. These are known as Opposed Rolls, 

territory it would not be permissible. and are used where a challenge will result in either win or lose, pass 
or fail. 

& Characters can only augment the primary skill with a single An Opposed Roll is determined thus: both participants roll their 
other skill. respective skills. The winner is the one who gains the better level of 

& An augmenting skill increases the value of the primary skill success. If the participants score the same level of success (a stan- 
by twice its Critical range (ie, 20% of the skill). So, in Ana- dard success each, or a critical each), then the winner is the one who 
thaym’s case, using Locale 33% she would increase her Ride has the highest dice roll still within the success range of the skill. 
by 7%, giving her a Ride of 45%. However, the chances for For example, Lodz, a thief of Meeros, attempts to cut the purse of Senator 
Ciritical and Fumble are the same as if the primary skill was Odas. Tlus calls for a Sleight roll by Lodz which, the Games Master says, will 

be opposed by Odas’ Perception. The dice are rolled: Lodz scores 45 on his 
Sleght skill of 70%, and Odas scores 63 on hus Perception of 66%. Both have 

50



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

succeeded in their rolls but, because Odas has rolled higher than Lodz, and is still DIiFfFfEeRrEeNnTtIiaALl ROoLlLlSs 
within hus skill range, he isjudged the winner. Lodz has successfully cut the purse, Differential rolls are similar to Opposed rolls except that instead 
but Odas has quite clearly seen him do 1. of a simple win or lose result, the difference in levels of success are 

In a bid to save his skin, Lodz attempts to ke his way out of trouble. “The calculated. Primarily used for the resolution of combat (see page 
cord snapped, sir”” Lodz protests. I merely caughtyour purse as it dropped, and 94), Differential Rolls can also be used in other situations where the 
was about lo return it to_you.” This calls for a Decet rollfor Lodz, opposed by Games Master wishes to increase the detailed results of a contest. 
Odas’ Insight roll. Lodz has Deceit 78%, and rolls 07 — a critical success. Odas A Differential Roll is determined in the following manner: Both 
has Insight 64%, and rolls 62. Here, Lodz quite clearly has the better level of participants roll against their respective skills and suffer the results of 
success: a critical against Odas’ standard success. Lodz manages to sweet-talk their roll as if tested in isolation. There is no outright ‘winner’ per se, 
has way out of a sticky situation, and he walks away thankful, but ruing his bad but whoever gained the higher level of success gains an advantage 
luck at so nearly being caught. equal to the difference in the success levels between them (assuming 

one participant gains at least a standard success or better). If both 
If both participants fail in an Opposed Roll then either: participants score the same level of success (a standard success each, 

or a critical each), then there is no additional effect. 
& Describe the situation, leaving both sides hanging in dramatic 

tension, then re-roll the contest to establish a winner DiirfrfFerReenNtTiIaAlL ROoLlLl REeSsUuLlTtSs 
& The Games Master should produce some explanation or cir- 

cumstances that suit the nature of the failure Result of  Antagonist Antagonist Antagonist Antagonist 
Rolls Critical Success Failure Fumble 

In the Lodz and Odas example, both of them failing in the initial 
rolls would mean that Lodz failed to cut the purse, and Odas failed Protagonist B 2 o ‘ 

Cre[flgolnlx No Benefit Wins 1 level of ~ Wins 2 levels of  Wins 3 levels of 
to notice him trying: it is easy to re-roll the contest. In the case of e Success Success Success 

Lodz trying to lie his way out of trouble, if both fail in their rolls 
Protagonist Antagonist Wi i " 

then the Games Master informs the players that both of them are . i No Benefit Wins 1 level of  Wins 2 levels of 
Success 1 level of Success 

suddenly distracted by the sounds of a skirmish across the market- Success Success 

place as a brawl breaks-out between rival merchants. Lodz can make R Antagonist Antagonist 
Protagonist . . 

a swift exit, and Odas has his attention absorbed by the merchants’ il Wins 2 levels of ~ Wins 1 level of No Benefit No Benefit 

squabble. e Success Success 

Opposed rolls are frequently used in certain battle situations to P I 1 t . : 
F"’ a}f; - Wins 3 levels of ~ Wins 2 levels — No Bengfit No Bengfit 

overcome the effects of wounds or oppose a combat special effect. 
e Success of Success 

They are also used to resist poisons and disease, or shrug off the 
effects of baleful magic. 

OpppPoOSseEdD SkiiLlLls OVvEeRr 100% 
OvprpPoOsedD RooOLlLl EXxAaMmPpLlEeSs If the highest skilled participant in an Opposed or Differential 
Activity Opposing Skill Examples Roll has a skill in excess of 100%, that participant subtracts the dif- 
Bargaining/Haggling ~ Commerce vs Commerce, Influence vs Commerce ference between 100, and his skill value from the skill of everyone 

Chasing/Racing Athletics vs Athletics, Athletics vs Endurance, Ride vs Ride in the contest, including himself. This reduces the skill value of the 

Deceiving or Lying Deceit vs Insight, Sleight vs Perception opponents but leaves him retaining the advantage. 
The identification of who has the highest skill must be calculated 

Displaying Loyalty Passion vs Passion, Passion vs Insight, Passion vs Influence 
after any other modifiers for circumstances have been applied. 

Getting out of the Evade vs Athletics, Evade vs Mechanisms, Evade vs Ride 

Way 

Hiding or Sneaking Stealth vs Perception; Stealth vs Track Grourp RoollLls 
Pulling Rank Influence vs Willpower, Deceit vs Willpower Group Rolls are a time-saving way for Games Masters to deter- 

Staying the Course Endurance vs Endurance, Endurance vs Brawn mine the success of a group of individuals involved in the same task. 
There are two separate forms of Group Roll: Team Rolls and Sorting 

Swaying a Crowd Oratory vs Willpower 
Rolls. 

Test of Strength Brawn vs Brawn, Brawn vs Endurance 

Test of Wills Willpower vs Willpower, Seduction vs Willpower 

SIimMPpLlIifFyYiInNgG SuUBbTtRrAaCcTtIioOnN 
wWIitThH  SKkIiLlLlSs oOVvEeRr 100% 

Games Masters may find ad hoc subtraction for skills over 100% 
slows down theflow of their game. As an allernative suggestion, penalties 
should be rounded up to the nearest 10%. Thus in a conlest involving 
a skl of say 115%, instead of subtracting 13% from everybody in 
the contest, the Games Master can simply round the penalty up to 20% 

Nw huch is a faster calculation. r 

ol



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

Team RollLl Games Masters need to judge when to use multiple rolls to a 

In a team test, success 1s co-operative; everyone reaps the ben- group roll. Multiple rolls — one roll for each individual in a group - 

efit from a single success. If the group of bandits hunting Ana- is more realistic, but is time consuming. If it is important to keep a 

thaym are all trying to search for her hiding place in the forest, then game flowing and individual skill successes are not so important, a 

any successful Perception roll will reveal her to all the bandits. The Group Roll is more effective. 

Games Master rolls once for the highest skill in the team (the highest 
PRrOoPpOoRrTtIioOnNAaLl SKkIiLlLl SUuCcCcEeSsSs 

Perception skill among the bandits, for example), and if the roll is 
Occasionally it may be necessary to determine the success of 

a success, everybody in the team succeeds. If the roll is a failure, 
a large group of people performing the same task, in a situation 

everybody fails. 
in which there is no margin for error. In this case, simply take the 

A ‘reverse’ team test can be used in a situation where one failure 
skill being used and apply that as the percentage of success for the 

can spell disaster. For example, if a group of hunters are attempting 
whole group. 

to stalk a deer, any failed Stealth test will startle the quarry. In this 
For example: a group of 100 troops are attempting to wade across a 

case, the hunter with the lowest Stealth skill rolls a Stealth test. If he 
Jast-flowing river a short distance from a high and treacherous waterfall. Thus 

succeeds, everyone succeeds. If the roll is a failure, everybody fails. 
calls for an Athletics skill test. A faled skill test for an individual would result 

SoORrTtIinNgG RoLlLl in thewr being swept away by the current. Rather than rolling 100 skill tests, 

In a sorting test, success is individual. For or using a Group Roll to determine 

example, the same group of bandits are being whether all 100 soldiers make it 

chased by Anathaym, which calls for opposed across, the Games Master can sim- 

Ride tests. Some of the bandits have a Ride Dby rule that the Athletics skillfor the 

skill of 40%, some of 50%, and some of 60%. group represents what proportion of 

The Games Master makes a group roll for the that group successfully completes the 

bandits, which results in a 49. Those with skills task. If the troops have an Athletics 

of 50% or more succeed, while the slower ban- skl of 75, then 75 of them will 

dits - those on a skill of 49 or lower - begin to make 1t to the other side of the rwer, 

fall behind (unless the remainder of the bandits and the remaining 25 will be swept 

slow their progress to allow their fellows to keep away. 

up). 

52



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

SKkIiLlLlSs SuUMmMmAaRrIiEeSs 

StTaAnNdDAaRrdD SKkIiLlLlSs 
All - Combat  Styles  are Skill Basic Percentage Skill Basic Percentage 

SIR+DEX Athletics STR+DEX Influence CHAx2 

Boating STR+CON Insight INT+POW 

Brawn STR+SIZ Locale INT x2 

Conceal DEX+POW Native Tongue INT+CHA 

Customs INTx2 Perception INT+POW 

Dance DEX+CHA Ride DEX+POW 

Deceit INT+CHA Sing CHA+POW 

Il IDIO3SHROMY Stealth DEX+INT 
Endurance CON x2 Swim STR+CON 

Evade DEX x2 Unarmed STR+DEX 

First Aid INT+DEX Willpower POW x2 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsiIoOnNAaLl SKkIiLlLlSs 
Skills in wtalics are used Skill Basic Percentage Skill Basic Percentage 

wm Mage. Acting CHA x2 Literacy INT x2 

L Lo Acrobatics STR+DEX Lockpicking DEX x2 
Animism: Binding, and 
Trance Art POW+CHA Lore INT x2 

Binding POW+CHA Mechanisms DEX+INT 

Mpysticism: Meditation Bureaucracy INT x2 Meditation INT+CON 

and Mysticism Commerce INT+CHA Musicianship DEX+CHA 

Courtesy INT+CHA Mpysticism POW+CON 

Theism: Devotion and Craft DEX+INT Navigation INT+POW 

Exhort Culture INT x2 Oratory POW-+CHA 
Devotion POW+CHA Seamanship INT+CON 

Somer.y: Traocation and Disguise INT+CHA Seduction INT+CHA 
Shaping Engineering INT x2 Shaping INT+POW 

Exhort INT+CHA Sleight DEX+CHA 

Folk Magic POW+CHA Streetwise POW+CHA 

Gambling INT+POW Survival CON+POW 

Healing INT+POW Teach INT+CHA 

Tnvocation INT x2 Track INT+CON 

Language INT+CHA Trance POW+CON 

PAaSssIioOnNSs 

A person, in a romantic or familial context 30% plus Loved one’s POW+CHA 

A person in a platonic context (a friendship or loyalty, ~ 30% plus Character’s POW, and subject’s CHA 
for example) 

A person in an averse context 30% plus Character’s POW, and subject’s CHA 

An organisation or group of people 30% plus Character’s POW+INT 

A race or species 30% plus Character’s POW x 2 

A place 30% plus Character’s POW+INT 

An object or substance 30% plus Character’s POW x 2 

A concept or ideal 30% plus Character’s POW+INT 

53



