Mythras:  Culture & Community

— — 
=&H x )( I < i KI 0 S (LR SO QR <N B o B LB | 2 < B < e 

Culture & 
Community

— — 
= i X o2 oM oK GOn X jad 

Yy m KW S (LR SO QR <N B o B LB | 2 < B < e 

ulture and community play an important part in MYTHRAS personal interests, and have the option of learning a cultural Com- 

C character creation. Culture determines the kind of society bat Style. 
in which the character was raised, and so prescribes certain Professional skills are further explained in the Skills chapter on 

outlooks and philosophies he or she might have. More practically, page 44, but in brief they represent those skills which cannot be 
culture helps define the values of the various skills that shape your attempted without years of rigorous study and specialised training. 
character’s overall capabilities. Community details the family, both Whereas a character has a basic ability in all Standard Skills, they 
immediate and extended, which helps to define kinsfolk and rela- have zero ability in any Professional Skill unless chosen as part of 
tionships with them. their cultural upbringing or career. 

When applying cultural skills perform the following steps: 

& Apply the static bonuses to Customs and Native Tongue: 

CUuLlTtUuRrEe these are +40% to each, irrespective of the culture chosen. 

There are four basic human cultures: Barbarian, Civilised, & Select three Professional Skills from the options offered 

Nomadic and Primitive. & If desired, select a single Combat Style 

A description of each cultural background follows and includes & Distribute 100 points amongst the listed Standard Skills, the 

a view of the culture from the perspective of one of its members. chosen Professional Skills, and the Combat Style (if selected), 

Incorporated in the description is a list of skill bonuses and new skills increasing that skill by 1% for every point spent on improving 

appropriate to that culture. Players should apply the skill bonuses it. Players are free to choose how much each skill is improved 

immediately to the Standard skills on their Character Sheet, and by, but each skill must receive a minimum of 5% and cannot 

add the additional new skills, known as Professional Skills (intro- receive more than 15%. 

duced in the next chapter), to the appropriate section of the sheet. 
Chosen Professional Skills start off at their base characteristic 

In many cases a cultural background lists a range of skills and invites 
value as per Standard Skills. Some Professional Skills such as Crafts, 

the player to pick one, or more, that will gain a bonus: in this way 
Languages or Lores offer choice of a specialisation. In these cases 

players from the same cultural background can ensure that their 
the speciality chosen should be one which suits that culture. 

adventurers are different in the areas they have developed. 
Characters need not invest any points into a Combat Style if they 

Also note that each culture comes with several Passions (see 
are disinclined to do so, as some cultures have non-combatant mem- 

page 82). Passions are optional rules for MYTHRAS but they can add 
bers whether due to gender, caste or philosophy. Cultural Combat 

a great deal of depth and characterisation to the adventurer you 
Styles usually reflect the informal training received by the commu- 

are creating. If Passions are being used, then the Cultural Passions 
nity for hunting, personal protection or civil defence. 

define ingrained preferences and prejudices for that culture. If Pas- 
Each culture comes with a range of evocative names for Combat 

sions are not required, then simply ignore the entries. 
Styles. However, no weapons are defined, because Combat Styles 
are intended to be flexible tools for the Games Master to tailor the 

CUuLlTtuURrAaLl SKkIiLlLl POoIiNnTtSs weapons to the particular culture or setting. Refer to the Combat 
Each culture lists a variety of Standard Skills that the charac- Style section in the Combat chapter for further guidance. 

ter learns as part of his formative development within that society. 
These are core abilities which all characters from the same specific 
culture improve to some degree. Characters also learn a number 
of more specialised or esoteric Professional Skills according to their 

13

Iv] 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

BAaRrBbAaRrIiaAnN CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 
Tribal in nature, barbarians tend to shun civilisation, view- & Loyalty to Clan Chieftain 

ing those who live in large towns and cities as weak and corrupt. & Love (friend, sibling or romantic lover) 
Although their own settlements are also sedentary, they tend to be & Hate (creature, rival or clan) 
far smaller and closer to nature. Barbarian tribes occupy distinct 
territories, often half tamed wilderness, which they regard as their 
own for hunting, grazing and farming purposes. Most are adept in ThHEe BAaRrBbAaRrIiAaNn'’Ss VOoIiCcEe 
the use of weaponry as they must overcome many dangers through- “The people of the towns and cities call us barbarians because our houses 
out their lives — facing creatures of the wilds or mustering to defend are not made of mortared stone, and we choose not to crush ourselves together like 
their lands against rival tribes. Since they live in small communities oo many fish in a shallow pond. They call us barbarians because we choose 
the ties of kinship and clan are strong elements of their society. not lo write down what we see, hear and say, but to memorise it as song. They 

call us barbarians because we fight amongst ourselves sometimes. They call us 
barbarians because they simply do not understand. Living in brick boxes must do 
something to the wits. 

We choose to be close to the ground that gave rise to all of us. Our homes are 
made from the things we can readily find and shape, and we do not believe in 
butlding hagh or covering the ground in dressed marble. Life is hard; we appreciate 
it that way. 1t us good 1o feel the rain on our cheeks and the sun on our backs as we 
g0 about our business. Why lock ourselves away? The gods created us to experi- 
ence the world, andy ou can’t do that ifyou spend all.your time imprisoned within 
walls. We accept the worldf or what it is and how 1t is. Town and city folk seek 
to make it something else. We appreciate comfort and warmth just like they do, 
but we take life as it comes, not as how we would like it be. A bed of good, fresh 
straw 1s as comfortable as any slab stuffed withf eathers — and probably cleaner, 
and certainly betterfor the back. 

Do not believe what you hear from them about our lack of laws. Our laws 
are embodied in our customs and traditions. When we transgress we expect to be 
punished. When we transgress badly we expect the punishment to be bad, too. We 
believe in saying what we mean, meaning what we say and doing what we have 
promused. Some view this as harsh, such as when we stone liars to death, but ths 
means we do not have liars in our mudst. Those templed lo transgress know the 
consequences and think twice. Thus helps us to live in harmony. 

You question our rads? Well, do the cwilisedf olk not make wars? Of course 
they do! When they make war thousands die, innocent victims amongst them. For 
us, we raid lo settle scores and to build our strength — not just the strength of the 
tribe but the strength of character too. We expect to be rarded and our neighbours 
expect us to raid them. Just as the hawk takes the dove on the wing. Life is a cycle 
and we are part of it; and when we raid, a_few might die, but most do not. And 
when we die we are ready for it and unafraid. Through raiding we understand our 
place and keep 1t, just as the wolf knows s territory and keeps that. 

So come and break bread with us. We do not care thatyou live in the stinking, 
narrow, disease_filled streets of Meeros; as a visitor to our hearth you are a guest 
and will be treated as such. You will be served furst, above even the headman, 

SKkIiLlLlSs and we will share with you all that we have, keeping nothing back. In return we 
ask for news and stories, and perhaps a small token of your appreciation for our 

StTaAnNdDaArRdD SKkIiLlLlSs hospatalaty in the form of a song or a dance. Come, the elders are waiting.’ 
Athletics, Brawn, Endurance, First Aid, Locale, Perception; and 

cither Boating or Ride. 

ExAaMmPpLlEe COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs CIiVvIiLliIsSeEdD 
Barbarian Fyrdman, Berserker, Horse Eater, Seaborne Reiver, The Civilised culture is epitomised by a semblance of law and 

Weapon Thegn, Wolf Hunter. order, underpinned by complex social codes, and supported by a 
bureaucracy. Civilised people believe themselves superior to all 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsiIoOnNAaLl SKkIiLlLlSs other cultures because their achievements tend towards perma- 
Craft (any), Healing, Lore (any), Musicianship, Navigate, Sea- nence: sprawling cities, imposing temples, celebratory monuments, 

manship, Survival, Track. and the recording of history and events in books, tomes, and scrolls. 
Of course, this is a thin veneer. The most civilised of cities can be 

14



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

more lawless than any barbarian frontier settlement; and the social dare attack us! We have the most important cily in the whole region. Attacking us 
codes may be cruder than the hospitality rituals of nomads. But the would invite hatredfrom our allies. So we are safe. 
Civilised culture prides itself on its achievements, its infrastructure, Well, yes, of course there’s crime. There’s always someone who isn’t prepared 
its professional artisans, and its ability to easily extend its reach to to work for it and steals instead. Why, only last week my shop was turned over, 
wherever it wishes to go. and the day’s takings stolen. And yes, there are muggings, and murders too, but 

the militia always catch the perpetrators; and when they do! Well, then they’ll see 
our marvellous court in action. The Queen herself presides, you know, and she’s a 
Jair woman. She can tell when someone’s gually just by staring at them. And don’t 
bother appealing; if you’re guilly, you’re off lo the quarries. That’s unless you’ve 
been stealing, in which case you losefingers. 

What 1 like most about the city is the wider communaty. It’s about meeting 
new people every day, each with a new story to tell. 1 like seeing my neighbours, 
even if they are a bit loud sometimes, and 1 like the atmosphere of market day or 
Gods’ Day when everyone’s excited and outfor a good time. I like having a roof 
over my head, and a warm bed to lie in at night (even if it is damp). I like having 
a door I can close on the world when I getf ed up with it, and knowing thatI  don’t 
have to go out with a spear to hunt my next meal. 

Me? Gwe up the city? No chance!” 

NOoMmAaDdIiCc 
Nomadic people are constantly on the move, with no home and 

SKkIiLlLlSs hearth to call their own. They may wander aimlessly about, or 
might have several camps they move to and from throughout the 

StTaAnNdDaArRdD SKkIiLlLlSs year. They raise few crops and instead follow the migrations of ani- 
Conceal, Deceit, Drive, Influence, Insight, Locale, Willpower. mals or fish, perhaps even herding their own domesticated beasts. 

Nomads are adept at subsisting on what they can quickly and easily 
EXxAaMmPpLlEe COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs scavenge from their surroundings, letting nothing go to waste. The 

Citizen Legionary, City-state Phalangite, Levied Archer, Light skills of the nomad culture should be tailored to their environment. 
Skirmisher, Street Thug, Town Militia. Some journey vast distances on foot, others live in caravans or ride 

strange creatures, and some drift across the oceans on great floating 
PRrOoFfEeSsSsiIoOnNAaLl SKkIiLlLlSs 

rafts. 
Art (any), Commerce, Craft (any), Courtesy, Language (any), 

Lore (any), Musicianship, Streetwise. 

CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 
& Loyalty to Town/City 
& Love (friend, sibling or romantic lover) 
& Hate (rival, gang, district or city) 

ThHEe CiiviiLlisseEdD VOoIiCcEe 
Isn’t this af ine city? I mean, isn’t it thef inesty ou’ve ever seen? Safe, too. The 

malitia sees lo that, and althoughyou might see the odd beggar wandering around 
the marketplace you're as likely to be attacked as you are to get eaten by monsters. 
We have rules, you see. Without rules we’re no better than animals. Rules help 
us live together without fighting, and to make things we can sell so that we can 
move up in the world. 

1t’s about order and a certain degree of comfort. And it’s about education. 1 
have listened to the priests and studied with philosophers, which helps me run my SKkIiLlLlSs 
business. Because I run my business I can buy education for my children so they 
can run businesses loo, when they’re older. I can buy my wife the things we need to StTaAnNdDaArRdD SKkIiLlLlSs 
bring up the children, and sometimes there’s a little left overfor a treat. Sometimes. Endurance, First Aid, Locale, Perception, Stealth; and two of the 
And to pay the taxes. IL's very important that we pay the taxes. following: Athletics, Boating, Swim, Drive or Ride depending on the 

But mostly it’s about protection. That wall around the cily is there_for more primary mode of travel. 
than show. 1t keeps the Badoshi out and lets us live in peace. The garrison patrols 
the borders, and the wall, and alerls us when enemues are near. Not that they’d 

15



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

ExAaMmPpLlEe COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 
Camel Cavalry, Feathered Death Flinger, Horse Lord, Whale PRrIiMmIiTtIivVEe 

Hunter, Wheeled Warrior, Wolf Runner. Of all peoples primitives are those that live closest with the land, 
in tune with its hidden secrets. Other cultures commonly dismiss 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsiIoOnNAaLl SKkIiLlLlSs them as little more than animals, yet they merely eschew the tech- 

Craft (any), Culture (any), Language (any), Lore (any), Musician- nology that so many others take for granted; relying instead on flint 

ship, Navigate, Survival, Track. spears and arrows, and their skill for survival in the wild. Living in 
extended family groups, primitive cultures gather around very sim- 

CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs ple dwellings that can range from caves and areas of natural shelter 
through to lean-tos or very basic huts. Primitives are typically hunt- 

& Loyalty to Tribal Chieftain/Khan er-gatherers with either few, or poorly developed, systems for farm- 

& Love (friend, sibling or romantic lover) ing and husbandry. However, certain cultural beliefs, often based on 

& Hate (creature, rival or tribe) superstitions, can be very well defined. Few primitive cultures have 
developed anything approaching a written language although paint- 
ings and other pictorial symbols serve as a means of communication. 

ThHEe NOoMmAaDd’’s VOoIiCcEe 
In the winter we move down to the shelter of the valleys where our people 

have made camp every yearf orf ifly generations. We wait until the ground thaws, 
lwing all the while on the dried meats and fruts laid down in the autumn and 
protect ourselvesfrom the snow and cold. Lasty ear we arrived in the valley to find 
it had been occupied by savage, diseased wolves, and we had to drive them out 
and cleanse the place with fire. A dozen died in that fight. A dozen hands fewer 
to tend the herd andf orage. 

In the spring we move to the high plateau, where the hunting is good. The 
Great Hunt takes place in that time, when the strong go and_find antelope, leop- 
ard, andy ak, and the rest move the herd up out of the valley. Those are good days, 
and we gwe thanks to the spirits, and sacrifice a cow or two. We meet the other 
clans at the Great Sky Cairn, and exchange news, and gifis. There is always a 
Jeast, and many sore heads, but we agree the business for the year, and discuss 
what the game trails are like, and how the pasture holds out. Last year one clan 
brought with it a monster they had captured and tamed. It was a scaly thing with 
tusks and hide like tree bark; the shamans said it was unnatural, but the other 

clan kept it as a watchdog 
And then in the summer we move out across the high plateau where we graze 

our amimals and gatherf ruits to preparef or the winder. Sometimes we baitle, seek- 
ing to hold the best grasslands, or raid barbarian settlements lurking in thef orest, 
but mostly we know peace. 1t is difficull to keep enemies when you’re always on 
the move. Newther do we waste. Waste is an winsult to the gods! We eat, or find a 
use, for everything we hunt. We honour what nature provides, and do not squander 
at. 1t brings tears to the eyes and heart to see the waste in the stinking cities. 

Why do we follow this life? Because of the animals, because of the seasons! 
The world moves and so must we. If you stay in one place you sap the earth and 
it stops giving. Stay in one place and sooner or later enemzes or monsters_find_you, 
and before you know ityou’re_fighting every day instead of every now and again. 
By moving we learn the land and take its best. If you set down roots, you become 
like a plant and we are not plants. We have legs and we walk and run like the SKkIiLlLlSs 
deer walk and run. We are free and being free we must move_freely. Our hunters 
and herders are strong because we keep our blood moving and stay in time with StTaAnNdDaArRdD SKkIiLlLlSs 
the seasons, moving when the earth and the spirits say it is time to move. Never Brawn, Endurance, Evade, Locale, Perception, Stealth; and one 
stop moving. Even when death claims us, we go to the Great Hunting where all of either Athletics, Boating or Swim. 
s spring and the game s good, and the spirits look after us as we have looked 
after them. ExAaamMpPlLeE COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 

We have a good life.” Flint Death Dealer, Ghost Warrior, Head Hunter, Jaguar Brother, 
Jungle Savage, Savannah Hunter. 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsiIoOnNAaLl SKkIiLlLlSs 
Craft (any), Healing, Lore (any), Musicianship, Navigate, Sur- 

vival, Track. 

16



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Steve, the GM has already decided that the characters are residents of a 

& Loyalty to Chief/Headman cvilised city-state named Meeros, loosely based upon the myths of ancient 
& Love (friend, sibling or romantic lover) Crete. Anathaym s thereforefrom a Civilised culture. 
& Hate (something that scares or intimidates you) She begins by adding the default 40% bonus to Customs and Natwe 

Tongue, then chooses the three Professional Skills she learned growing up 
in Meeros; deciding upon Courtesy 23% (INT+CHA), Lore (Geography) 

ThHEe PRrIiMmIiTtIivVEe VOoIiCcEe 28% (INTx2), and Streetwise 16% (POW+CHA). 
“The world is full of fear It is a wrathful place and we know s wrath. Anathaym now has 100 points lo assign to the listed Standard Skills and 

So we hude. We try to keep the gods happy with sacrifices of blood but still they the three Professional Skills she selected. She applies them thusly: Conceal +5, 
punish us. We asked the wise woman why the gods are so angry, and she told us Deceit +5, Drive +5, Influence +10, Insight +10, Locale +5, Willpower 
it is because we are not perfect, like they are, and it us ourf aull. So now we know. +10, Courtesy +15, Lore (Geography) +10, and Streetwise +15. The 
Can we be perfect? I don’t think so. 1 think the gods like 1t that way. I think they remaining 10 points she withholds since she wishes to learn a Combat Style. 
like having something to blame and then punish. So we fear them. Steve says that, as a citizen of the city, Anathaym can take the Meerish 

Our home 15 the great cave that runs deep into that mountain. When the gods Slinger style, learning as a child the art of slinging which was augmented 
send the monsters to eat us wef lee deep inside whale the warriors hurl their spears with the city’s civic training in shorisword and medium sheeld. The style starts 
and the shaman makes her chants. We paint our victorzes on the cave wall and tell with a base score of 27% (STR+DEX), and she adds her remaining 10 
stortes about them so the children will know that even though the gods are angry points to it. 
at us we are a strong people and want to make things good. We eat the monsters Finally, for her Passions, Anathaym takes Loyalty (City), Love (Sibling), 
we kill and make weapons and toolsfrom the bones. and Hate (Rival). These will be determined later. 

Our wise woman told us that the people who live in the woodlands two days Afier applying her cultural modifiers Anathaym’s skills are: Athletics 
Jrom us made the gods even angrier because they stole the secret of fire, so we 27%, Boating 24%, Brawn 21%, Conceal 25%, Customs 68 %, Dance 

went and killed them. We thought the gods would be pleased with us for killing 25%, Deceit 28%, Drive 28%, Endurance 26%, Evade 32%, Fist Aid 
the thieves but that night they sent a great plague and more monsters, so maybe 30%, Influence 28%, Insight 531 %, Locale 33 %, Native Tongue 63%, 
the wise woman was wrong, but she probably wasn’t. I wonder how you get to Perception 21%, Ride 23%, Sing 16%, Stealth 30%, Swim 24%, 
be a wise woman? Unarmed 27 %, Willpower 24 %o; Courtesy 38%, Lore (Geography) 38%, 

Our chieftain married the young woman who we took as a slave when we and Streetwise 51%; Combat Style (Meerish Slinger) 37 %o. 
killed the enemues, and we know that us wrong because her hair is red. Red is the 
colour of the trickster god but the chieflain won’t listen. He was challenged and 
killed the hunter who challenged him and ate his heart. He gave the brain to hus 
new wife so she might eat and gain some wisdom. Perhaps that’s how you get to 
be a wise woman? Because she has red hair wef ear her; and wef ear the chieflain 
because he’s changed. She’s put a spell on him, we think. That’s probably how 
her people stolefire from the gods. I think she did 1. 

1 made my furst spear yesterday. I knapped the flint myself, and tied it firm 
with the twine I made from dried pig gut. 1t us very straight and very sharp. 1 
went lookingfor an enemy to kill, andf ound someone lost in the hulls notfarfrom 
our cave. I tested my spear on him and it stuck so deep I nearly broke the hafi 
getting it out. I ate hus heart without bothering to make it hot, and now I have his 
soul. I'm not sure I want two souls, so I will go to the wise woman and give her 
the skullfrom the enemy I tested my spear on, and she will take the second soul 
from me. It will be my slave then, and I will make it worship me like a god, and 

1 will make itfear me. 
Because the world us_full off ear” 

BAacCkKgGrRoOuUnNdD EVvEeNnTtSs 
Background Events are notable things that have happened in the your character then do re-roll the event. Background Events should 

character’s life before he began his career as an adventurer. Some enrich the character — not disrupt it. 

are formative; some are fortunate and some are unfortunate. Back- If your starting character is older than the MYTHRAS standard, 

ground Events are optional, but using them adds to the character’s then you may gain multiple rolls on this table (see Age, page 33). If 

history, and can be used by creative players and Games Masters as you roll a result twice, re-roll one of the results. If two results contra- 

hooks for scenarios or even complete campaigns. dict each other either discard both and roll again, or agree with the 

If using Background Events you may feel free to choose an Games Master how best to make both results work together. 

event that appeals or roll randomly. Random rolls may produce The Background Events tables begin on the next page. 

very interesting, but potentially conflicting results. If a roll is not to 
your liking or seriously disrupts the idea and concept you have for 

17



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

BAacCkKgGrRoOuUnNdD EVvEeNnTtSs 
01 A case of mistaken identity resulted in a period of imprisonment or some other punishment for your character. You have long 

wanted to find whoever it was who was responsible for the crime you were punished for. 

02 A curse has been placed upon your family. For generations all children of the opposite gender to your character have died in 
tragic circumstances. It falls to each generation to select one who will find a way to lift the curse, and you are the chosen one. 

03-04 A girl in your community wants you to carry messages to a boy in another community. She pays you well enough and you 
believe that the messages are love letters. But can you be sure? Why are these two not allowed to communicate directly? What 
would happen if they did? What would happen if anyone else found out? And why did she choose you to be her messenger? 

05-06 A group of travelling players visited your community and stayed for several weeks. They performed feats of legerdemain, 
juggling and acrobatics. As a child you were enthralled, and spent as much time as you could with them. Then you were 
kidnapped, carried far away from your homeland and abandoned. How did you escape? Did you even make it home? 

07-08 A priceless object owned or protected by your family was stolen by enemies. On his deathbed the head of the family made 
you swear to retrieve it from the thieves. You’re not sure what the item is or why it is so special, but loyalty to your deceased 
relative drives you to complete your oath. 

09-10 A relative or family member has bequeathed you a secret: the whereabouts of a lost legendary heirloom; the location of an 
imprisoned deity; or maybe the rituals for a special spell. The information is shrouded in family myth, and you have been 
oath-sworn to either protect this secret or find and awaken it. 

11-12 A sibling has been betrothed to someone from your childhood that you consider an enemy. You are forced to make a sullen 
peace with this new in-law but your hatred still burns beneath. What is worse is that you fear your sibling is being turned 
against you. What can you do to set matters to rights? 

13 You believe yourself to be suffering a divine or magical curse. Moan, groan and whinge at every opportunity, or remain 
completely stoic at every misfortune that befalls you in the future. 

14-15 An old, warlike relative has died, bequeathing you a useless suit of armour which will fall apart the first time it’s used. 
However the scratches and dents tell of great battles and a life of adventure. Despite the shoddiness of the armour you are 
very fond of it and, when wearing it, you feel as if the spirit of your relative is watching over you. 

16-17 A scholar, priest or mystic visits your community, and demonstrates his almost supernatural wisdom. You are fascinated by 
what you see but the individual does not remain long enough for you to learn more. You do, however, receive dreams that 
show you meeting up with this person again and learning from him. When, where, and how will form a future part of the 
story. 

18-19 Distant relatives demanded that you be sent to stay with them. Your father could not refuse — why was that? The relatives 
treated you well but were always cold and distant with you, despite insisting that you live with them for several years. On 
returning to your true family, they had also become distant with you. What is at the root of this strangeness? Why have you 
been caught in the middle? 

20 Fate has closely watched over you as you grew to adulthood. Siblings have drowned, friends died from plague, parents 
disgraced, but you have emerged unscathed from everything. Are you truly blessed by the gods? 

21-22 Tor some reason you have shamed your family and have been cast out. What did you do? Is there hope of reconciliation? 
Were you to blame or were you just a scapegoat for someone else? At first you lived on your wits, but people in your 
community grew suspicious and shunned you. 

23-24 It transpires that one of your parents is, in fact, a member of a noble family (and possibly even a prince or princess) who has 
turned their back on their heritage to live a simple life. This does, however, mean you are an heir to a noble estate or title. Will 
you ever realise your inheritance? 

25 On your birthday two years ago it rained frogs. Last birthday it rained lizards. What will it rain this year? More to the point, 
why does it rain strange things on your birthday? 

26-27 Playing one day you discovered a dead man — a warrior — in the cellar or outbuildings. Who was he? And more importantly 
who killed him? Was it your father, or worse still your mother, who had been looking rather nervous of late... 

28-29 Somehow you have picked up a loyal companion or retainer. Maybe a childhood friend; perhaps a hanger-on from some 
chance encounter. This does not necessarily make your companion a welcome presence, but the relationship has somehow 
endured over the years. 

30-31 You come into possession of a mundane item that a friend or family member claims is magical. So far the item has not 
exhibited any magical properties, and it could well be that some form of quest is needed to activate its magical abilities. 
Worse, the item if known about may attract unwelcome attention. What the abilities are remain for the Games Master to 
determine at an appropriate time. 

18



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

1d100 Event 

32 You have been marked as special by the gods. You carry with you a symbol or marking that is of great reverence to a particular 
religion or cult. The gods and the cult in question may be very far from where you were born, and may even be an enemy of 
your culture, but this makes no difference. 

33-34 You have a favoured and beloved pet which follows them everywhere. It has no abilities or special powers, but offers comfort 
and companionship. 

35 You have studied with a noted master, scholar or wise man. Whenever you meet up with the teacher, you can request personal 
tuition for one or more of your related Professional Skills. 

36-37 You have suffered some form of horrific attack that has left you psychologically scarred, and extremely wary about the 
situation or thing which harmed you. This might be nearly dying from drowning, man-eating lions or necromantic magic. 
Whatever it is, gain a new passion of Fear (thing which harmed you) or roleplay your subsequent trepidation. 

38-39 You have sworn a fervent oath with a member of the opposite sex. You are compelled to help this person, and never betray 
him or her. By some intuition you are always aware of their presence in your dreams, and sense any danger he or she is subject 
to even when many miles apart. 

40-41 You were born into a once rich and powerful family that has somehow fallen on rough times or suffered a severe blow to its 
reputation. Perhaps the family name is a mockery, or reviled, or even revered still by those who know the truth. 

42-43 You were born with an unusual sensitivity to a particular substance, species of creature or type of supernatural power. When 
the subject in question is nearby, you suffer a mild physiological effect such as tingling fingers, sneezing or headaches. Upon a 
successful Perception roll you can determine the rough location of the detected thing; 

44-45 You were either born with, or somehow received, a mark, blemish or scar that resembles a glyph. The symbol does not exhibit 
any power yet, but all who see it remark on it — some acting with wonder, and others fear. A quest of some kind is needed to 
awaken the glyph; but is this wise? Only time will tell. 

46 You are magically gifted, attracting the attention of a scrying sorcerer, the priest of a cult or a wandering shaman. If 
permitted, you may choose to enter a magical profession. If magic-using characters are not permitted, you instead become the 
focus of that magician, who desires to extract your inherent power via some suitably nefarious, and possibly fatal, means. 

47 You awoke one morning to find a valuable object, one with significant religious or ruling importance, lying in bed with you. 
The question of how precisely it got there aside, do you keep the object with the intent to sell or use it later, or do you return it, 
thus placing yourself under suspicion of its theft? 

48-49 When you were a child you nearly died from a fatal disease, but since then you have never, ever been ill. Are you simply 
paranoid about any type of infection or do you believe you are immune to any form of contagion? 

50 Several years ago you were attacked by an unidentifiable wild beast, which nearly killed you. The creature vanished but 
since that time you've felt an ominous presence when wandering the edges of your homelands. Thus far the beast has not 
reappeared, yet perhaps it’s merely biding its time. What was the creature, and why is it hunting you? 

51-52 You spent your childhood as a slave before either escaping or being freed. The experience had a significant effect upon you. 
How do you view slavery now? Do you hate and fear it, or did the experience institutionalise you? 

53-54 The eldest surviving member of your family harbours a great secret, and many times they have told you that when you are old 
enough, it will be entrusted to you. What is this secret? When will the time be right? Your Games Master will decide, but until 
then you must be patient. Can you contain your curiosity? 

55-56 As a child you witnessed some ceremony or ritual that had a profound effect on your psyche. The chants and dances haunt 
your dreams, and you feel compelled to discover what it was you witnessed. The outcome of the ritual is unknown, it might be 
for good or ill; you do not know. Its true nature must be discovered through adventuring 

57-58 Your family was hunted by powerful foes. Why is this? Why did your family need to keep moving and hiding? What do the 
pursuers want? Are they still following you? Should you confront them? You are sick and tired of being on the run. 

59-60 You are a bastard-born. Your mother swears your father was a man of note and station, but she herself is of low status, and 
you are considered even lower than she is. Where your father is, no one knows, but you would love to meet him some day and 
discover the truth about him. Perhaps, if reunited with your father, the stigma of your birth might be erased. 

61-62 You are adopted. Your true parents either abandoned you or were killed, and the family that raised you has always accepted 
you as one of their own — except for certain jealous relatives who see you as an imposter, and would gladly have you cast out 
of the family so their own offspring might benefit. You have had to fight their resentment for most of your life but now things 
appear to be coming to a head. 

63-64 You came across a tinker or peddler on the road. He offered to read your fortune for a silver piece, but you had no money, and 
instead offered to share your meal with him, which he accepted. Reading your palm he declared you would become a great 
hero and travel the world, but not before encountering ‘A great sorrow, a great victory, and a great reversal.” You have often 
wondered what he meant because none of those things have come to pass. Might the tinker have been lying? 

19



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

1d100 Event 

65-66 You come from a family that is artistically adept. Their fame has spread far and wide, granting you access to high status 
patrons if you yourself are an artist, craftsman or performer. Conversely it is a constant source of irritation when casual 
acquaintances are taken aback at your lack of talent. 

67-68 A sibling committed a heinous crime that has brought shame on your family. They fled soon after, vanishing entirely, casting 
suspicion on you. Were you yourself falsely blamed for the crime? Or did you willingly confess, to preserve the remnants of 
your family’s honour? Is blood truly thicker than water? 

69-70 You are a twin. Your brother or sister has similar characteristics and skills to yourself but you are clearly different people. Are 
you close, as twins usually are, or estranged? You always seem to know where your sibling is, even if relations between you are 
not good. 

71-72 You are the sole survivor of a horrific catastrophe. Your entire family was wiped out by some tragedy leaving you to fend 
completely for yourself. 

73-74 You met a great hero (or villain) at a time when he or she was unknown. You suspected, perhaps, that this person was destined 
for greatness (or infamy), but you still became friends before you parted. Will they remember you? Will you still be friends? 

75-76 Your elder brother or sister is (or was) a great hero for some reason, and you live somewhat in their shadow. You are desperate 
to prove that you are your sibling’s equal, and want to outdo their deeds, proving that your family can produce more than one 
hero. 

71-78 Your family crossed a wealthy or influential family and have suffered because of it. That family is now your Enemy. 

79-80 Your family follows a religion or philosophy unaccepted by the rest of your community. Possibly they have kept their beliefs 
hidden, or perhaps they simply ignore the sneers and cold looks. Whatever, it marks you as different, and the increasing 
persecution has made your convictions stronger. 

81-82 Your family has a reputation for luck. Everything your family does turns-out splendidly; it has wealth it has never seemed to 
work for; it has a strong reputation; no ill has ever befallen it. You have, however, heard something that makes you suspicious 
of this charmed life you've led. How did you family come by this luck? Was a much higher price — perhaps a darker price — 
paid for it? 

83-84 Your family performed a great service for a wealthy noble or person of influence. As a reward you were taken into that 
person’s service. You gain this powerful patron as an Ally. 

85-86 Your family was ever cruel to you. Why, you do not know, but your siblings always seemed to receive better treatment and 
more favour. You have always been denied. That is why, at the first opportunity, you left them behind, forgetting them and 
secking the life of an adventurer. 

87-88 Your hereditary line is slowly becoming extinct, every year one member of the diminishing family dies in a frightful and 
twisted ‘accident’. What is behind this run of misfortune? Are you family cursed or has some evil agency taken to expunging 
your blood line? Are you next? 

89-90 Your family was involved in some community event that has made them either famous or infamous. The legacy of what they 
did follows you everywhere. What did your family do? Can you shake the reputation? Do you want to? 

91-92 Your family was wealthy once, but is now reduced to poverty. How did it lose its fortune? Was it due to circumstance or the 
actions of others? If others, how did they ruin you — and how will you make them pay? 

93-94 Your family, previously poor and beggared, has ever struggled to survive. Yet when you were a lad somehow your father 
attained great wealth. How did they come by this money? What effect did it have on the family? Will somebody arrive to 
reclaim or perhaps terminate the mysterious fortune? 

95-96 Your family, through financial need, sent you into service with another family of some prestige. As their ward you have learned 
many things about them including a dire secret that, if revealed, would get you killed. What is this hidden truth? What damage 
could it do? Decide with your Games Master. 

97-98 You accidentally killed a close friend or sibling when playing together. The horror of the situation caused you to flee, 
remaining silent about the tragedy. When the adults finally went out to search for the missing adolescent no trace could be 
found, although they searched the area where you left the body. You have lived with the guilt ever since, but whatever became 
of you compatriot? Did they escape death or did something unspeakable happen to the body? 

99-00 You recently experienced a supernatural epiphany which shook you. Whilst out alone a god personally came to speak with 
you, or perhaps a host of spirits manifested and danced about you. The event, whatever it was, may be seen as a blessing by 
the local community or conversely deemed blasphemous. In more secular societies the experience, if reported, could be viewed 
as the onset of insanity. 

20



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
7o determane her Social Class, Anathaym rolls d100 and gets 97. Fortune 

Having determined the character’s culture it is now time to has smuled wpon the heroine since she us descendedfrom the Aristocracy. The 
develop his community ties. Community consists of a number of Games Master decides she s closely related to one of the city’s ruling oligarchs, 
related elements: family, contacts, background events and passions. granting her a privileged position in sociely and allowing her to live in her 
Passions have been mentioned in the Culture section earlier, but you Jamaly’s well appointed home. 
will find the rules for them here. For her starting money Anathaym has 4d6 x75 SP - her roll s 9 which 

Work through each of the Community elements as described gues her 675 SPan total. As a member of the aristocracy her Money Modyfer 
below adding the details to your character sheet. This is an opportu- of 5 increases this to 3,375 SP personal wealth. The Games Master says 
nity to really bring your character to life — to work out what family that Anathaym has 1,000 SP in ready coin, with the remaining 2,575 SP 
he has, what friends and enemies he might have made, what strange being in the form of jewellrey and clothes. 
or odd things may have happened to him in his past, and what things Next Anathaym checks the status of her parents — her 1ol of 67 indicates 
drive his loyalty, his loves and his hates. that only her father remains alive, her mother dying whilst she was a hitle 

gurl. She then rolls 19 on the siblings table and gets a 1 on the 1df4or how 

CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr SocciiaALl CLlAaSsSs many brothers and susters she has. Emma decides her character’s one sibling us 

Social Class measures the prosperity, resources and social posi- a sister by the name of Kara. 

tion of characters. Their class influences the starting money avail- The Games Master thinks it ts wise lo delay the generation of her extended 

able to them, and likely Background Resources — things to which the Jamaly until later. However aroll of 51 on the Family Reputation table shows 

character has access and can return to when not adventuring. It is that whilst Anathaym’s famaly is not promanent, it has no black marks against 

additionally used to determine income between adventures (see the it. A further roll of 77 on the Connections table resulls in one Rival. 
Economics and Equipment chapter). The Games Master decides that Xenos will be Anathaym’s Rwal. They 

Unless it has been predefined as the consequence of a Back- come_from_famailies of a simalar background, and even grew up together. But, 

ground Event or specifically decided by the Games Master, a char- as Xenos has matured he has become something of a debauched wastrel who 

acter’s Social Class is rolled randomly — although it can be chosen constantly mocks Anathaym’s diligence. He also harbours designsf or her sister, 

or re-rolled if the Games Master permits. There are four separate Kara, and Anathaym is determined to protect Kara from this rat. Xenos has 

tables, one for each culture, which determine the class the character broken many hearts, caring nothing for the wreckage he leaves belind. Ana- 

or his family have enjoyed for most of their life. thaym s determined this will not happen to her sister... 

Class defines broad categories of social strata, but may have 
more subdivisions as determined by the game setting. In general 
the more advanced the culture, the more complex its social struc- 
ture. Players should confer with the Games Master to decide what 
precise title or rank is appropriate for their character. 

The Social Class tables start on page 24. 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy 
All characters begin the game with commodities or currency 

worth: 

& Barbarians: 4d6 x50 silver picces 
& Civilised: 4d6 x75 silver pieces 
& Nomadic: 4d6 x25 silver picces 
& Primitive: 4d6 x10 silver picces 

Multiply the character’s starting money by the Money Modi- 
fier to determine the available cash or commodities the character 
has. At the Games Master’s discretion additional money generated 
by the Money Modifier may be in the form of goods or chattels 
rather than ready coin. 

The Background Resources reflect additional items the charac- 
ter either can start the game with — such as a mount (horse, camel 
or beast appropriate to culture) —and things he can call upon, such 
as servants or slaves. 

FaAMmIiLlIiEeSs 
Every character comes from a family. The family might be 

rambling with dozens of members or small and tightknit with only 
a handful of kin. The family’s reputation might help or hinder 

21



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

the character, or its connections might prove useful for all sorts of 
reasons now or in the future. PEerRsSoOnNAaLl COoNnNnEeCcTtIioONnSs 

If desired, roll 1d100 on each of the Family tables below to Why are the characters adventuring together? What connects them and 

determine parental status, the number of siblings the character Jorms the companionship? It is recommended that each player choose at 
least one of his_fellows and, working with the chosen colleague, devise a 

has, and the extended family’s structure. Next determine the fami- 
reason_for the relationship. Some examples: 

ly’s connections and reputation. Does the family enjoy respect in its 
community? Do its connections bring it a level of power or prestige? &K Childhoodf riends who have continued together into adulthood. 
Are there are skeletons in the closet that might threaten stigma or & Members of the same community or culture. 
ostracism? Does reputation bring allies or enemies? & Members of the same profession, o, iffrom different professions, have 

It is recommended to leave the details of large families vague. had chance to meet and do business. 
One way of developing a story for MYTHRAS characters is to intro- « 4 lucky encounter in a tavern, inn or other social establishment. 
duce family members — such as that shrewish aunt or roguish cousin & A shared acquaintance (such as a third character in the group). 
— through roleplaying and scenario development. Keeping details 
vague at this stage gives the Games Master the flexibility for creating Starting characters wishing to form a personal connection as part of 

such introductions. Family tables start on page 25. their background are rewarded with a pool of Luck Points available to 
the entire party, rather than just a single individual. The number of Luck 
Points starts at two and increases by 1 per character who hasformed a per- 

ALlLlIiEeSs,, COoNnTtAaCcTtSs,, sonal connection within the group. This pool of pointsfunctions in a very 
simalar way to the individual Luck Points a character has, but are therefor 

R the benefit if all those within the group. They can only be drawn upon by 
IiVvAaLlSs AanNDd ENnEeMmIiEeSs a character when he is actively helping, or intends to help, another character 
Allies, Contacts, Rivals and Enemies are people, or perhaps (this can be anyone in the group needing help; not just the character with 

organisations, that a character has developed a relationship with for whom a relationship has been established). 
either good or ill. At this stage all one needs to do is give these sup- For example, the players in Steve's game decide that they will all hail 
porting characters a name (Contact: Gundleus the Sage, for exam- Jrom the same city, Meeros, and belong to_families that have known each 
ple, does just fine; or, Enemy: Cult of Yethis); fleshing out the details other for years, the characters growing-up together. There are four players 
can come later. allogether: Emma (playing Anathaym), Kathrine (playing Kara), Fames 

(playing Hallax), and Rob (playing Tor-Irdeen, a minotaur character). 
& Ally: a friend, colleague or relation who shares the same cause 

Clearly Rob's character is unlikely to have grown-up with the humans, 
as the character and will offer help and guidance when called 

0 Steve rules that connections will come later;, through play. But for the 
upon. Depending on their personality the Ally may want a 

humans of Meeros the Group's Luck Points equal 5: two points to start 
favour in return or might provide aid for free. 

with, plus one pointf or each human, and the connections they havef ormed. 
& Contacts: people of potential influence the character knows. 

Steve tells Rob that in the furst session of game play, Tor-Irdeen will be 
A Contact is an acquaintance who can help, not one who will. 

introduced and gwen a chance to form a connection with the humans. 
& Rival: those who oppose the character for the same or similar 

Depending on how successful this plays out, then the Group Luck Points 
goals, and will attempt to interfere with or harass him. 

will increase 1o 6. 
& Enemy: someone who wishes the character harm, and will 

go to lengths to ensure the character suffers in some way. & - 
Enemies may take direct or indirect action, possibly trying 
to influence contacts and allies to bring about the character’s 
misfortune. PAaSsssSiIoOnNSs 

Using Passions in MYTHRAS is optional but their use can greatly 
Allies, Contacts, Rivals and Enemies are intended to act in the 

assist players and Games Masters in deepening the nature of the 
background, providing occasional interactions with the character 

character, introducing plot hooks based on a character’s desire or 
but not always being prominent in their lives. These can be good 

prejudices, and helping the player to understand who his character 
sources of background information and, in certain circumstances, 

is, what drives him, and so on. 
drive crucial parts of a scenario, but they are generally intended 

Passions are measured in the same way as skills; they have a start- 
to be bit-players in the characters’ stories rather than fully-fleshed 

ing value based on two characteristics and are rated between 1 and 
non-player characters. Of course, they may well develop into ful- 

100 (or higher). Passions represent several things: 
ly-formed non-player characters as a campaign develops, and so 
Games Masters should keep careful note of who they are, how they « Loyaltics and allegiances 
look and act, what they know, and how they have (and will) interact & Strongly held beliefs or ideals 
with the character. This will maintain consistency in how they are & Emotion felt towards someone or something 
portrayed. 

A Passion can be improved in the same way as a skill or it can 
be either increased or decreased by the Games Master depending 
on circumstances. Aud, for example, may have Loyalty to Achatus, his clan 
chief, at 70%. However if Aild were to make an alliance with an enemy clan 
that Achaius disapproves of;, then the Games Master could, quite reasonably, have 
Aild’s Loyalty drop to 50%, representing an erosion of his fidelity. Conversely, 

22



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

PAass1ioOnNSs TAaBbLlEe 

Object of Passion Examples Starting Percentage 

Lover, Sibling, Wife, Parent, Aloof or Unsuspecting 
A person, in a romantic or familial context . . 30% plus Loved one’s POW+CHA 
P ’ Object of Desire 

A person in a platonic context (a friendship Leader, Teacher, Ruler, Master, Rescuer, Priest, 30% plus Character’s POW 
or loyalty, for example) Enemy and subject’s CHA 

Enemy leader, Rival worker, Husband of Desired 30% plus Character’s POW 
A person in an averse context 

Lover, Murderer of Friend, Thief and subject’s CHA 

Family, School, Temple, Religion, Local 
An organisation or group of people 30% plus Character’s POW+INT 

Community, Military Unit, Guild, Nobles 

Foreigners, Non Humans, Tigers, Supernatural 
A race or species 30% plus Character’s POW x 2 

Beasts, Ghosts, Primitives 

A Country, Home Town, Holy Place, Capital City, 
A place 30% plus Character’s POW+INT 

Graveyards, Mountains 

The Iron Throne, Diabolic Relic, Magic, Darkness, 
An object or substance 30% plus Character’s POW x 2 

Ancient Heirloom, Gemstones 

An Ethic, Moral Code, Freedom, Personal Honour, 
A concept or ideal 30% plus Character’s POW+INT 

Betrayal, Dishonesty 

Achaius might grant Adld a_favour which increases the Loyalty to 80%, demon- 
strating the strengthening bond. MAaRrRrIiAaGgEe 
A Passion can be for anything — a person, an organisation, an Thus 15 purely optional, but 15 the character married or betrothed to 

ideal, even an object. Passions are typically described by a verb such be married? Marriage s the most common way for_famalies to advance 

as: Comfort, Desire, Despise, Destroy, Espouse, Fear, Flee, Foreswear, Hate, their status, position and power;, and so making marriage arrangements, 
evenfor children who are notyet old enough to be married, s common. To 

Love, Loyally to, Protect, Repudiate, Respect, Seek, Subvert, Torment or Uphold. 

The verb describes the nature of the relationship. Loyalty, for decide Marital Status roll 1d100 for the character and compare it with 

instance, does not always indicate respect; Respect does not always the character’s base value Influence skill. If the result is equal to or less 

indicate love; Despising something is not the same as hating it; Lov- than base value Influence then the character is Betrothed — that is, has been 

ing someone is not the same as being loyal to them. The verb used promased into a marriage. If the 1d100 roll is equal to or less than 10% 

should therefore reflect how the character feels either personally or of the character’s Influence then the character is already married. 

culturally towards the subject. How happy or prosperous this marriage is depends entirely on the 

A Passion can be established at any point in the game — either player and Games Master. Take a litle time to think about the nature of 

during this phase of character creation or, and perhaps most inter- the relationship: is it a political or economic betrothal? Does Social Class 

estingly, during game play. All a character needs to do to establish a play a part? Do the two pariners love each other? Perhaps they hate each 

Passion is stipulate that he intends to form the passion and give it an other. If love or hate are involved then consider establishing a Passwn to 

appropriate adjective: Love (Elissa), for example; or Shun (Sorcery). represent the depth and nature of the relationshp. 

The starting value of the Passion varies according to its type - see And, if the character s marred, have any children formed from the 

the Passions Table, opposite. union? Again this can be an agreed situation between the player and 

All the Starting Percentages may be modified by the Games Games Master. Or the player can roll 1d4-1 to determine the number 

Master to reflect deeper or lesser devotion; thus, Love (Elissa) might of claldren present. If there are claldren, then roll 1d4 to determine the 

begin for a character at 55%, using the above Starting Percentage ages of the chaldren. If the age rolls are wdentical, then the character has 

calculation, but, because the character is so faithful to Elissa (a child- produced twins or even triplets. If the character starts play middle aged 

hood sweetheart), the Games Master decides to increase the Starting or olde; roll the children’s ages on the Age Table (see page 34) as if they 

Percentage to 75%, taking into account the lifelong devotion. were one category younger. 

Where a person or people are concerned, the Passion does not 
need to be reciprocated. It is up to the Games Master to decide - 3 
if it is or not, and the Player must decide if unreciprocated love 
will strengthen his character’s Passion, or weaken it. If the decision 
is made to strengthen the Passion (unrequited love often drives the 
heart to deeper fondness or infatuation), then the Passion value can 
be increased (or decreased, if the depth of feeling is diminished) by 
1d10%. 

This section only details what Passions represent and their default 
values. How Passions are used in the game is discussed in Chapter 6. 

23



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

SocciiaALl CLlAasss TAaBbLlEeSs 
BAaRrBbAaRrIiaAnN SOoCcIiaALl CLlAaSsSs 
14100 Class Example Title Money Mod Background Resources 

. Nothing but the clothes on their back, and maybe some personal 
01-05 Outcast Exile, Outlaw 0.25 

armament 

06-15 Slave Bondsman, Caxtos, Peon, Serf, Thrall 0.5 Resides on owners property; owns a few keepsakes 

Churl, Commoner, Feine, Freedman, Karl, Rented accommodation or farmland; possesses own tools or 
16-80 Freeman 1 . i 

Labourer livestock, simple weapons 

Owns a house, and either a farmstead, business or ship; furniture; 

81-95 Gentry Faldormen, Flaith, Hauldr, Reeve, Thane 3 tools, weapons & armour, mount, several servant or slave retainers; 

support from locals 

i Lo i i As above but lives in a great hall and possessions are of excellent 
96-100 Ruling Chieftain, Cyning, Eorl, Jarl, King 5 

quality; fealty from a country or smaller region 

Ciiviiulisseedp SocciiaALl CLlAaSsSs 
14100 Class Example Title Money Mod Background Resources 

. Nothing but the clothes on their back, and maybe some personal 
01-02 Outcast Beggar, Mendicant, Vagabond, Vagrant 0.25 

armament 

03-20 Slave Chattel, Captive, Helot, Servant 0.5 Resides on owners property; owns a few keepsakes 

. i Rented accommodation or farmland; possesses own tools or 
21-70 Freeman Citizen, Peasant, Proletariat, Tenant, Vassal 1 

livestock; simple weapons 

. . . Owns property, farm or business; furniture, tools, weapons & 
Bailiff, Equite, Master, Official, Steward, . 

71-95 Gentry Wl 3 armour, mount, several servant or slave retainers; support from 
arden 

locals 

Owns several properties, extensive farmlands or multiple 
Archon, Baron, Count, Duke, Lord, Nawab, . i i 

96-99 Aristocracy . . 5 businesses; expensive furniture, tools, weapons & armour, mounts, 
Noble, Oligarch, Patrician, Satrap . . . 

many servants or slaves; fealty from regional inhabitants 

Caliph, Czar, Dictator, Emperor, Imperator, 

100 Rulin; g MaharajYa h, Mogguull,  Pasha, Pharaoh, 10 As above but of p priceless quqaualliittyy;  fealty ty from a dominion or nation 

Potentate, Prince, Rajah, Shah, Sultan, Tyrant 

NoMmAaDd SocciiaALl CLlAassSs 
14100 Class Example Title Money Mod Background Resources 

Nothing but the clothes on their back, maybe some personal 
01-05 Outcast Outlaw, Rebel 0.25 o 

armament, and mount or small boat if suitable 

i i Resides on conquered lands, or in owner’s yurt or vessel, owns a 
06-10 Slave Bool, Convict, Prisoner, Thrall 0.5 i 

few keepsakes, plus tools or simple weapon 

. i Possesses own mounts, cart or small boat; owns yurt or similar, half 
11-90 TFreeman Arad, Haran, Kinsmen, Subjects 1 

a dozen livestock, weapons, simple armour, a slave or two 

. i Owns many mounts, carts or boats; large yurt or similar, several 
i Chieftain, Emir, Khan, Khaqan, Sea Lord, . 

91-100 Ruling . 3 dozen livestock, good weapons, good armour, some slaves, fealty 
el 

from tribe and conquered peoples 

PRrIiMmIiTtIivVEe SOoccCIiaAlL CLlAaSsSs 
14100 Class Example Title Money Mod Background Resources 

01-05 Outcast Outlaw 0.25 A weapon and a few knickknacks 

06-80 Freeman Tribesman 1 Simple home, tools, and primitive weapons 

Large hall; valuable skins, totems, trophies, tools, 

81-100 Ruling Chieftain, Elder 2 cooking implements, decorated primitive weapons, 

simple armour; support from tribe

24 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

Famiirly & COoNnNnEeCcTtIioONnSs TAaBbLlEeSs 
PAaRrEeNnTtSs TAaBbLlEe COoNnNnEeCcTtIioONnSs TAaBbLlEe 

1d100 Parents . Allies, Contacts, Enemies and 
1d100 Connections . 

01-20 Both Parents living Rivals 
91-40 Single Parent — Father 01-20 No connections of note None 

41-60 Onec birth parent plus step—parent Family enjoys reasonable Roll 1d4. On a 1 you gain an 

61-80 Single Parent — Mother 21-80 connections within its Ally; 2 a Contact; 3 an Enemy; 4 

community a Rival 
81-00 Both parents dead 

Family is well connected in the 

SIBLINGS TABLE 81-90 community and‘is known to As above but roll twice 
Siblings Table

those commanding local power 

1d100 Siblings As above, but the family also 

01-10 None 91-95 enjoys some status with those As above but roll thrice 

11-30 1d4 commanding regional power 

31-70 1d6 As above but the family also 

71-90 1d8 96-00 enjoys some status with those As above but roll four times 

91-00 1d10 commanding national power 

EXxTteEnNdDEedD FaAMmIiLlyY TAaBbLlEe 
1d100 Grandparents Aunts & Uncles Cousins 

01-10 None None None 

11-30 1d2-1 1d2 1d3 

31-70 1d3-1 1d3 1d4 

71-90 1d3 1d4 1d6 

91-00 1d3+1 1d6 1d8 

REePpUuTtAaTtIioOnN TAaBbLlEe 

Allies, Contacts, Enemies 
1d100 Reputation 

and Rivals 

01-15 Family has a poor reputation 1d3 Enemies or Rivals 

Family’s reputation is sound, 

but there may be a few skeletons . 
16-35 1 Enemy or Rival 

and secrets better left locked 

away 

36-65 A sound family reputation - 

Family enjoys a good reputation 

although there may be those 
66-85 i . i 1 Contact or Ally 

either inside or outside the 

family who could tarnish it 

Family’s reputation is 

86-00 untarnished and of excellent 1d3 Contacts or Allies 

standing 

25



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

BAassic CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr CRrEeAaTtIioOnN ELleEmMEeNnTtSs 

1 2
CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCcSs 'AAcCtTiIoOnN POoIiNnTtSs 3
3d6 for S. TR, C\ ON, DEX, POW;  and C«H A. 29 d6+6 for INT+ DEX Action Points o M 

INT and SIZ. Allocate results to fit the concept. Results may DAamMAaGgEe  MoIVdIOiDfIFiIeErR 
2 

be allocated in the order listed, or distributed as the Games 12 or Less 1 B 

Ma1zs ter Eand PhEyers fE xgr‘ee . ‘ 13-24 2 STR + SIZ Modifier 

Alternatively distribute 80 points amongst the charac- 25-36 3 
5 _ 

teristics. Minimum 3 (8 for INT and SIZ), maximum 18. . . 5 or Less 1D8 
. ’ Tor every additional 12 points +1 

Use all the points. 6-10 -1D6 

11-15 -1D4 

ONARACTERISTICS ATTRIBUTES 16-20 —1D2 
Origiaal  Max.  Curent Origisal. Carren 21-95 +0 

26-30 +1D2 

[ _Consmunos @) [l @) Damace ¢ Mo Moviries 9 3135 1D4 
[ ON@, EPERENGEMTDIRR 36-40 +1D6 

VRGO RATE Maaggiic PoIiNnTts = 
POW characteristic 

InmaTive 

Luck Poms 4
Movesment 

tive effects): 

EXxPpEeRrIieEnNcCEe MOoDIdFifIiEeRr 

8 Lacation Points 

Exp. 
Heal 

CHA Modifier 
InNIitTiIaAtTIivVeE BoONnUuSs = e pow [ O] wok Lol Arm 

Average of INT & DEX wWra [ 6 or Less ! 
BEX + CHA ] — Risht Arm 7-12 0 
INT ol [ | 
st [ O T 13-18 +1 
W 
ws 00 » Each 6 points +1 

INT « X | - L. 

46 Lett Lot 

1 Right Leg @ 

5
HEeAaLlIinNgG RAaTtEe 

11 . CON Healing Rate 

6 or Less 1 

SKkIiLlLlSs & COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 6 7-12 9 

These are calculated using the characteristics listed for each skill. 

At this stage you generate only the beginning values; skills will increase 15-18 

as you progress through Cultures and Community, and Careers and MOVEMENT = Each 6 points +1 
Movement = 

Development. 6m for Humans 

10 7
Hi1tT POoIiNnTtSs PEerR LoOCcAaTtIioOnN                                               CONN++SSIIZ @ 

Location 1-5  6-10 11-15 16-20 21-25 26-30  31-35 3640 LLuucckk  PPooiinnttss 
Head | 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Euck 

POW Points 
Chest 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 

6 or Less 1 
Abdomen 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

7-12 2 
Fach Arm 1 1 2 3 4 5) 6 7 

13-18 
Each Leg 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

Each 6 points +1 

Hit Points appear on the second page of the character sheet and are shown here for clarity. 

26



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr CRrEeAaTtIioOnN SuUmMMmAaRrYy 
11 CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr COoNnCcEePpTt 

& Decide on the kind of character to play. Keep it simple for now. More will come. 

2 CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCcSs 

& If playing a human, 3d6 for STR, CON, DEX, POW and CHA. 2d6+6 for INT and SIZ. Allocate results to fit the concept. 
& Alternatively distribute 80 points amongst the characteristics. Minimum 3 (6 for INT and SIZ), maximum 18. Use all the 

points. 

33 CCaAlLcCuUlLaATtEe ATtTtRrIiBbUuTtEeSs 
& Use the characteristics to determine Action Points, Damage Modifier, Experience Modifier, Healing Rate, Hit Points, Luck 

Points, Movement and Initiative Bonus as described in pages 8 to 10. 

44 S StaTAnNdDaArRdD S5KkIiLlLlSs 
& Calculate Standard Skills by adding together the appropriate characteristics. 

55 Curlture 

& Decide on a Cultural Background: Barbarian, Civlised, Nomadic or Primitive. Allocate 100 points amongst the listed Stan- 
dard Skills, the chosen Professional Skills and the Combat Style for the chosen culture. Skills must have a minimum of 5% 

and cannot receive more than 15%. Customs and Native Tongue gain +40% each. 
& Decide on Cultural Passions: Loyalty, Love and Hate. 
& Calculate your character's Starting Money. 

66 BaAcCkKgGrRoOuUnNdD 

& Roll or choose a Background Event from pages 18 to 20. 
& Roll for Social Class (or choose according to the campaign), for Parents, Family Standing, Connections. 

77 CAaRrEeEeRr 

& Choose a Career from those available to your character's culture. 
& Distribute 100 points amongst the career’s listed Standard Skills and whatever Professional Skills were chosen, Not all of the 

available skills need to be improved, but no individual skill can receive more than 15%. 
& Identify if the career uses magic and consult the appropriate Magic chapter for information on spells and so forth. 
& Consider Cult or Brotherhood membership as described in the Cults and Brotherhoods chapter starting on page 192. 

8&8 Bonuss SkiiLlLl Poiints 
& Depends on age, but default characters have 150 points, with a limit of assigning no more than 15 points per skill. Choose 

one additional Professional skill as a hobby speciality. 

9O EqQuiipPmMEenNTt 
& Determine Starting Equipment based on Social Class. 
& Buy any additional equipment needed using the Starting Money determined as part of culture and social class. Refer to the 

Economics and Equipment chapter starting on page 54. 

10 FinNAaLLlYly.... 
& Don't forgge t to gIveg ive yy our character a name. Look to establish Connections with other characters. 

27



