Mythras:  Mysticism

B oF X = oM k¥ NI LA S K K (F & K E B« o XN 

Mysticism

| G S|B Mmoo Em K K KB 3 M Qaw T X W 

ysticism is the implementation of phenomenal abilities 
MEeDdIitTaAtTiIoOnN (IINNTT++CCOON)) 

by the force of one’s willpower, either via contemplative 
M Meditation is the ability to reach a state of concentration by 

concentration, or by summoning or suppressing strong 
removing all extraneous distractions. Once achieved, this higher 

passions. The effects of mysticism can be great if used wisely, but 
mind state permits the mystic to tap their inner powers, and perform 

despite being modest in comparison to other disciplines in terms of 
feats of parallel thought impossible to non-mystics. Increasing com- 

flexibility and raw power, it drains the psychic strength of the user 
petence in Meditation improves the mystic’s ability to concentrate 

quickly. However, the path of mysticism encourages a philosophy of 
on several mystical abilities simultaneously. 

self improvement, as it augments the natural skills and capabilities 
A mystic may maintain a cumulative level of Intensity of active 

of the user. 
talents equal to their Meditation skill divided by 10. Thus, a mystic 

Mystics do not study spells; instead they learn to channel their 
with Meditation 66% can manifest a maximum Intensity of 7. This 

energies into enhancing their personal capabilities, sometimes far 
intensity could be applied to a single active talent —in which case no 

outstripping those of their fellows. Through a combination of med- 
other talents could be used — or split between several talents: Aug- 

itative technique and applied knowledge, mystics can increase their 
ment X to Intensity 2, Invoke Y at Intensity 1, and Enhance Z to 

likelihood of success with skills, invoke seemingly supernatural pow- 
Intensity 4 for example. When a talent becomes inactive, its intensity 

ers, and develop incredible reactions to direct threats and other hos- 
is immediately released, and can be used for something else. 

tile situations. 
None of this is achieved through overt magic, but by under- 

standing the true nature of his capabilities, focusing on the ener- 
gies needed, and channelling them in the right way and at the right 
time to achieve what is needed. By necessity, a mystic’s powers are MEeDdITitAaTtIioONnSs oONn PoOWwEeRr 
self-centred: they cannot be conferred on others. Mysticism is a very Of all the magic disciplines avarlable in MyTHRAS, mysticism is per- 
personal journey that only the individual can experience. What he haps the least magical. To an external observer, much of what a mystic us 
learns on that journey elevates him far above the norm. capable of achieving seems the result of incredible skill or training, rather 

than some supernaturalf orce. The source of a mystic’s power, at least the 
Magic Points with which ke performs his acts of excellence, lends itself 

SEeeEkKIinNgG TthHE primarily to self generation (see Where Do Magic Points Come From, 
e page 115). This may contradict or undermine the principles behind the 

TRruUTthH WIiTtHhIinN magical ecology of the setting if the Games Master does not wish a more 
exotic form of mysticesm. 

The two key skills of mystics are Meditation and Mysticism. 
As an alternative, mystics may provide thewr own Magic Points by 

Meditation is used to train the mind of a mystic, enabling it to 
performing long hours of meditation, dance, creating art or even choral 

achieve a state of relaxation and perfect self-belief. It also enables singing, thus keeping the restoration of their power both in check, and also 
them to be able to concentrate on several activities at once. Mys- 

Ni n keeping with the philosophy of mysticism. ticism represents the depth of knowledge concerning a particular r 
mystical path, granting knowledge of the esoteric abilities - disci- 
plines known as talents - available to that philosophy. 

154



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM 

Myyssttiicismm (PPOOWW+CON)) Mjjuu’’s SaAgGaA 
A favthful student of the Path of Shadows, Mju is already in possession 

Mysticism is the knowledge concerning the secret techniques and 
of the talents Augment Perception, Augment Stealth and Invoke Dark Sight. 

abilities taught to a particular Path of Mystic enlightenment. It not 
Yet he has been forbudden from learning more of the path’s secret talents until 

only controls the maximum Intensity at which any particular talent 
he rises to the rank of disciple. To prove himself worthy, Mju s tasked to 

can be implemented, but may also govern how quickly the mystic 
climb Cloud-reach Mountain a week before the sacredf estival of Sun Return, 

masters each of the talents available to that path. 
and remain upon is summatf or seven days in deep contemplation of the inner 

Mysticism is used to achieve the following effects: 
meaning of his path. 

& Augment specific skills by shifting their difficulty grade Mju accepts the challenge, and begins the long trek across the desert of the 
& Enhance the mystic’s attributes (Damage Modifier, Healing hagh plateau to its northern peaks. He has many adventures along the way, at 

Rate, and so on) one point arding a par of susters who are seeking an ancient temple of Yethus to 
& Invoke particular traits or abilities clear the ruins of their evil. Eventually he reaches the white tipped mountain, 

carefully scaling its dangerously sheer slopes. The broken off summat s cold, 
A mystic is limited to using each individual talent at a maxi- 

windswept, and ice covered, but Mju takes this as part of the test, settling 
mum Intensity of one twentieth of the Mysticism skill from which 

hamselff or days of meditation to wgnore the hardships. 
it originates. Thus a mystic with 34% in the Path of the Awakening 

During the following days he starts to notice certain oddities about the 
Dragon would be limited to implementing any of its talents at an 

peak. A slightly rank smell in the brief periods the wind stops blowing Odd 
Intensity of 2 at most. However, using Meditation he may be able to 

scratches, and perhaps carvings on the rocks which_form a natural amphithe- 
maintain several of these talents at the same time. 

atre. Even some ragged scraps of what could be brown crusted desert robes 
Jrozen into the ice. Something about all these hinis at an unforeseen danger, 
50 Mju augments his Perception skill to keep alert during the remaining days 

PAaTthHSs AanNDd TAaLlEenNTtSs of meditation. 

Each incidence of the Mysticism skill must be tied to a specific On the night of Sun Return hus sharpened hearing picks up the sounds of 

foundation of mystical knowledge, known as a path. These paths are Napping wings. Mju invokes has second talent of Dark Sight, and spots a vast 
number of winged beasts all headingf or the summiat. In desperation he utilises 

often based on ancient hermetic teachings, passed down in sacred 
fus last talent to augment lus Stealth skill, squeezing himself into a narrow 

books or by esoteric gurus or secret mountain-top schools. 
A path contains knowledge of multiple mental disciplines called crevasse on the downwind side of the peak. All that night the assorted griffons, 

talents — namely skill augmentations, trait invocations, and attribute wgart, and giant eagles dance atop the mountain in a great ritual celebration, 

enhancements — which are defined later on in this chapter. There is and at day break, they fly off in different directions. 

no preset limit to the number of talents a path can contain, although When Mju_finally returns to the travelling caravan of his master and 

the mystical school that has developed the path will have imposed its explains in respectful tones the sights he saw, the old guru knows that unlike 

own limitations based on its particular doctrine. Furthermore the many before him, lis student passed the test. Promoted to a disciple of the 

talents contained within a path tend to be linked, and these natural Path of Shadows, Mju us now free to learn the next two talents of his path... 

relationships will impose their own limitations. 
For example, the Path of Abjuration might include: Augment Endurance, It should be noted that some talents are potentially very power- 

Augment Survwal, Invoke Denwal (Food), Invoke Denal (Water), Invoke Denial ful, and should be considered carefully before being made accessible 
(Sleep), Enhance Fatigue and Enhance Hit Points. Conversely the Path of Shad- to characters. Games Masters may wish to limit the availability of 
ows maght offer Augment Perception, Augment Stealth, Augment Ranged Combat certain talents according to cult rank, ensuring that characters learn 
Style, Invoke Adhesion, Invoke Astral Projection, Invoke Dark Sight and Enhance the secrets of their path in a particular order, and withholding the 
Fatigue. most potent abilities until the cult deems them responsible enough 

Paths are therefore the mystical equivalent of Combat Styles: to be trusted with such knowledge. 
diverse talents and abilities folded into the umbrella skill of Mys- Mystic characters begin play with knowledge of a number of 
ticism. A path is usually tied to a profession or philosophy, and talents equal to one twentieth of their Mysticism skill. These will 
depending on the setting it might be rare for an adept to learn more generally be the least potent of the talents available to that path, as 
than one. suited to a low ranking or novice student. 

These different combinations of talents can lend a character 
some quite remarkable capabilities in a very wide variety of unusual 

Learning Talents
situations that differ from theism and animism. EARNING ALENTS 

Learning new talents is not just a case of handing over cash as 
if a financial transaction. Rather it necessitates an investment of 
time and Experience Rolls as described in the Magic chapter on 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MYySsTtIiCcSs page 118. Even if a character has a sufficient number of Experience 

If a character begins the game as a mystic he must choose one Rolls available, consent to learn a new talent must be sought first 

path to follow that is built from talents either designed by the Games since knowledge of these arts is carefully restricted by the masters 

Master, agreed between the player and Games Master, or chosen of a path. 

from the examples given in the Cults and Brotherhoods chapter. Gaining permission to learn new talents usually requires the 

Only one path can be chosen at this stage but others can potentially mystic to demonstrate a certain base competence in skill, loyalty to 

be learned and developed during the course of play. the master who teaches them, and possibly proof of their readiness 

155



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM 

by undertaking a difficult or dangerous test. There are countless Mjuju’’s SaAgGaA 
ways for a mystical order to winnow out those unworthy of learning As a disciple of the Path of Shadows Mju has learned the talents Aug- 
their most powerful secrets. Roleplaying the interaction between the ment Perception, Augment Stealth, Invoke Adheswn, Invoke Dark Sight and 
mystic and his teachers builds the depth of their relationship to that Enhance Fatigue. In addition, afler spending nearly a_year meditating in the 
path, and can form the basis for adventures. deep desert, he has also created hus own Path of the Jerboa, via which he mas- 

tered the talents of Augment Athletics and Enhance Movement Rate. 
Tlus gwes lam a lotal of seven talents. However Mju only possesses a 

UssIinNgG MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM POWof 12 which means he may only maintain the concurrent practice of 
six talents at any time. Afler much thought he decides to drop Enhance Move- 

Mysticism permits some extraordinary powers which can pro- 
ment Rate from his daily mental exercises and keep the others. If needed he 

duce dramatic results. Although less inherently flexible than sorcery, 
can resume the practice of enhancing his Movement Rate, restoring the ability 

and less crushing than theism, in their own niche mystics can be 
afler a week of meditation; but at the cost of dropping another talent from 

formidable foes. Their talents can boost their skills to phenomenal 
fus repertorre. 

levels, grant them unusual physical or mental abilities, and increase 
their attributes to those of legendary heroes. 

To gain access to these inner mysteries requires constant and Secondly the mystic must have enough Magic Points remaining 

regular practice. Although expensive in terms of magical strength, to attempt the talent. If too few remain either the talent doesn’t 

being dependent only upon themselves, mystics have no need to work or they may suffer some detrimental effect (see Running out of 

enslave spirits or return to temples to regain their effectiveness. Magic Points page 117). 

Indeed the potent nature of their talents can pose a serious chal- Last but by no means least; the mystic must pass the requisite 

lenge to magicians who follow other disciplines of magic. Mysticism skill check. Failure to implement the talent normally 
results in nothing more than the loss of a few Magic Points. 

ImMPplLeEmMEeNnTtIinNgG Aa TAaLleEnNTt CossTts oOFf ImMPplLeEmMEeNnTtIinNgG TAaLlEenNTtSs 
Summoning the strength to implement a talent requires a mystic Talents cost a variable amount of Magic Points to activate 

to utter a short mantra or exhale breath in a focussed shout, whilst depending on their type —see Magnitude and Intensity below— and 
making some sort of mystical gesture — normally a sweeping or strik- the success level of the implementation roll. 
ing motion — which aids concentration. In addition the mystic must Once the base cost is known, the Mysticism roll is made: 
satisfy the following conditions. 

Firstly the mystic may only implement a talent which he has spe- & Critical Success: the talent works, and only half the Magic 

cifically been taught. Knowing a path does not automatically grant Point cost is expended. 

understanding (or awareness) of all the talents which belong to it. & Success: the talent works, and the full Magic Point cost is 
expended. 

COoNnSsEeQqUuEeNnCcEeSs oOFf MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM & Failure: the talent fails, and a single Magic Point is expended. 
& Fumble: the talent fails, and the full Magic Point cost is 

Although mysticism can be used in a number of exotic, tmaginative 
ways.from creating mysterious desert hermals to ascetic philosopher monks, expended. 

it 1s inevitable that players will eventually want to create warrior mystics; 
attracted by the thought of augmenting therr Combat Style skills or number 
of Action Points to unbeatable levels. ImMPplLeEmMEeNnTtAaTtIioOnN TIimMEe 

Games Masters should carefully consider the consequences of allow- All mystical talents require one turn of preparation per point 

ing mystics access lo these types of talents. If permitted, then practitioners of their Intensity, and no other action may be performed whilst the 

of these Paths of Mysticism will be near unstoppable by mortal oppo- talent is prepared. On the last turn of preparation the mystic makes 

nents — which s not necessarily a bad thing provided it is embraced by a Mysticism roll and, if successful, the talent is initiated immediately. 

the campaign setting 
Thas can be done in a number of ways. A devotee of a mystic warrior MAaGgNnIiTtUuDdEe aAnNDd InNtTEeNnSsIitTyY 

tradition may be treated with fear or_fawning respect so that the character Magnitude is the Magic Point cost required to call upon a talent. 
rarely has to fight. Ordinary soldiers may develop specific tactics to take on Intensity is the level of effect achieved. These are as follows: 
such_formidable mystics, saturating their defences with volleys of ranged 
weapon_fure or sacrificially attacking en masse, fully expecting half their & Augment Skill: 1 Magic Point per level of Intensity. A level 

number to fall. Perhaps mystic warriors are sofearsome that it sf orbidden of Intensity improves the success chance of the skill by one 

by law for them to kill save in times of war or on specific command of grade. For example, increasing a skill from Standard to Easy 

their master. costs 1 Magic Point; increasing it to Very Easy costs 2, and 

So unless warrior mystics are commonplace in the setting, the Games so on. 

Master should expect to have foes scythed down; the only challenges being & Tnvoke Trait: 2 Magic Points. All traits have a default Inten- 

other mystics, maybe those of an opposing path. To get the better of such sity of 1. 

a character may instead require political intrigue, use of narcotics or poi- & Enhance Attribute: 3 Magic Points per step of increase. Each 

sons, alternate forms of magie, cunning traps or maybe just playing on step is a level of Intensity (for example, enhancing Damage 

the mystic’s passions. Modifier by one step, from 1d2 to 1d4 costs 3 Magic Points; 

. 4 

156



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM 

enhancing from 1d2 to 1d6 costs 6 Magic Points, and so spend a week recalling the talent he wishes to replace it with. A Med- 
forth). itation roll is required to see if the mystic succeeds. If the roll fails, he 

not only loses access to the dropped talent but must spend another 
The upshot for mystics is that use of Mysticism can be Magic 

week in meditative practice to re-master the new one. 
Point intensive when compared with other types of magic. How- 
ever, when used creatively, Mysticism can be incredibly potent. A 
character’s natural abilities can be enhanced to a level that is not 
necessarily available to other magical disciplines. TAaLleEnNTt DEeSsCcRrIiPpTtIioOnNSs 

Talents come in three varieties based upon the boost or ability 

DUuRrAaTtIioOnN oOFf TAaLlEenNTtSs they grant. These are either skill augmentations, invoking traits or 

Unless specifically stated in its description, a talent only remains enhancing attributes, as described in the following sections. Each has 

in place for the period of time required to action it. Once the imme- its own Magic Point costs and scaling limitations. 

diate task for which the talent was called upon has been concluded, 
its effect lapses. AUuGgMmEeNnTtIinNGg SKkIiLlLlSs 

Tor example, enhancing Movement Rate to run a race should The mystic augments his skills by concentrating on the nature 
last only for that race, augmenting a Combat Style would be for the of the task at hand, and channelling his own positive energies into 
length of that melee, whereas inducing Featherlight would remain attaining a desired result. A mystic literally envisages his own suc- 
until the mystic finishes walking over a river. cess, and then prepares himself to attain it. 

As a rule of thumb, once a mystic focuses his attention on Each level of Intensity improves the mystic’s chance of success by 
another, different task, the currently maintained talents drop. How- one difficulty grade (see Modifying Skills page 38). This can be used 
ever, until a talent is dropped the Magic Points used to implement it to counteract situational penalties the mystic is already suffering, or 
cannot start to recover. augment them to superhuman levels of skill. 

Common sense should be applied as to when the talent natu- A mystic cannot boost his skill chance beyond the grade of Very 
rally ends. It is unreasonable to suggest that an augmented Combat Easy. Any levels of Intensity beyond this are ostensibly wasted, but 
Style continues once the mystic’s foes have been defeated, or that an will come into play if the mystic is subsequently penalised by detri- 
invoked perception lasts beyond the investigation of a person or area mental circumstances. 
if the mystic becomes distracted by other events. 

InNvVoOKkIinNgG TRrAaIiTtSs 
DiisPpEeLlLliInNgG TAaLlEenNTtSs Traits are specialised physical, mental and emotional endeavours 

Since mysticism is based upon inner focus and strength of will, akin to the those found for many creatures. All traits by default have 
it is not normally susceptible to magical dismissal via spells such as an Intensity of 1, making them very useful abilities with which to 
Avert, Dismiss, Neutralise, and the like. The best way of dealing compliment the mystic’s other path talents. A trait confers a specific 
with mystics i3 to induce some form of mental or psychological dis- power for the duration it is implemented. 
turbance which may cause their concentration to break; or render The available traits are as follows: 
them unconscious, whereupon any active talents immediately drop. 

When subjected to such a disturbance the mystic is permitted ADdHhEeSsIioOnN 
to resist using their Willpower in an opposed roll against the skill The mystic can move freely on vertical surfaces, and even move 
actively used against them, in order to maintain concentration. For upside down on a ceiling with no special equipment. Such Move- 
instance, if injured by a thrown object, the mystic would oppose the ment is always at half the mystic’s normal Movement Rate. 
Athletics roll of the thrower. Some discretion is required to ensure 
that the distraction is valid to the situation. A separate Willpower roll ARrRroOWwCcUuTt 
is needed for each active talent. The mystic is able to parry and deflect projectiles (arrows, darts, 

Conversely mystics have no ubiquitous way of defending them- spears, and so forth) using his bare hands; or weapons not normally 

selves against direct magical assault, save by augmenting skills such permitted to perform such feats, such as swords or whips. 

as Endurance, Evade or Willpower. 
ASsTtRrAaLl PRrOoJjEecCTtIioOnN 

The mystic can project a visible, albeit ethereal image of himself 
LIimMIitTaAtTiIoOnNSs tToO TAaLlEenNTtSs to a distance in kilometres equal to his Meditation skill. The Astral 

The maximum level of Intensity at which an individual talent Protection acts a conduit for the mystic to communicate with and 
can be implemented is equal to one twentieth of the relevant Mys- observe a distant location, but he cannot physically interact with it. 
ticism skill. 

The maximum combined levels of Intensity of all active talents AUuRrAa (X) 
cannot exceed the Mystic’s Meditation skill divided by 10. The mystic projects a particular kind of aura (Fear, Intimidation, 

No matter how many paths and talents a mystic knows, he may Serenity, Mastery, and so on) that can be used to present a particu- 
only actively practice a limited number of them. A mystic can con- lar aspect to those who behold him. Overcoming the mystic’s aura 
currently maintain the training of a number of talents up to half the requires an opposed roll of Willpower versus the mystic’s Mysticism 
value of his POW. If the mystic wants to change one of the talents roll for invoking the trait. The aura affects all things within a radius 
regularly practiced, he may discard it from his training regime, and of the mystic’s POW in metres. 

157



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM 

Mjuju’’s SaAgGaA to attempt to remain unperceived by the mystic is one grade more 

Mju is travelling the dark streets of Meeros one night hoping to meet an difficult. 

oldf riend, when he spots a suspiciousf iguref litting along an alleyway, curved 
FeEaAtThHEeRrLliIgGhHTt 

knife in hand. He covertly follows the suspected assassin into the sacred grove, 
The mystic’s physical weight becomes negligible, allowing him 

located next to the senate house. Unfortunately for the mystic it w5 autumn, 
to balance on impossibly thin or slender surfaces, including those 

and the ground is littered with dry leaves which crunch underfoot. The Games 
that should not be able to support the his mass (twigs, saplings, and 

Master rules that crossing the leaves unheard s a Formudable task. So Mju 
SO on). 

lakes a_few moments to_focus on his Augment Stealth talent, implementing it 
at an Intensily of 3 to ensure success. This costs ham three Magic Points and 

FoORrMmIiDdAaBbLlEe NAaTtUuRrAaLl WEeAaPpOoNnSs 
modifies the difficully gradefrom Formidable to Eas). 

The hands and feet of the mystic are treated as size Large for the 
Mju follows the suspicious man into the senate house. Inside the peri- 

purposes of attacking and parrying in combat. 
style building it s almost putch black, Litle light from the starry night sky 
penetrating through the roof opening. Momentarily stumped Mju eventually HEeAaRrTt SlLooww 
discerns a_faint tllumination on the far side of the audience chamber; where The mystic is able to finely control his heart and metabolic rates, 
the knife wielder; holding a sofily glowing orb, s conversing with a shadowy reducing them almost to a standstill. Using this trait a mystic must 
cloakedf igure. remain completely inactive for its duration but, to all intents and 

Despite his augmented Stealth skill, Mju somehow gives away lus presence purposes, has no pulse, no heart rhythm, and organic functions 
as he creeps closer to the clandestine meeting. In a heartbeat the globe is extin- have ceased. He becomes immune to other Life Sense attempts and 
guished. Mju hears the refined accent of a Meerish noble whisper all him’ appears to be dead. Once the trait finishes the mystic’s faculties are 
before the sound of departing sandals leave the marbled hall. Hearing no other fully restored. 
Jootsteps Myu realises his life is in extreme danger: 

He decides he needs to invoke lus Dark Sight talent, taking a voluntary ImMmUuNnIiTtYy (XX ) 
penally to his Mysticism skill (see Casting Requirements page 119) for not The mystic is completely immune to one specific type of damage 
whispering the mantra aloud. Despite this Mju succeeds, andf or the cost of caused by a particular source. This source can be magical, physical, 
2 Magwc Points, reveals the darkened chamber to his mystical senses. The or energy based, but should be quite narrow in scope. Examples 
hunting knife weelder has no such advantage, and Mju breaks his neck from include, but are not limited to: cold, fire, electricity, iron, poison, 
behind. A quick investigation reveals the ritual scarring of the Brotherhood of disease, cutting, crushing, falling, impaling, and so on. 
Dust, branded upon the assassin’s tongue; the favoured tools of the Badosh 
Warlords... InNdDOoMmIiTtAaBbLlEe 

The Mystic is utterly immune to attempts at mind control or 
domination, including spells and spirit possession. 

AWwAaRrEeNnEeSsSs 
The mystic is aware of a particular kind of emanation (threat, LifFeE SeEnNSsEe 

love, danger, magic, and so on) within a radius equal to his POW In tune with the rhythms of nature, the mystic can determine 

in metres. He cannot gauge specifics; only that the emanation exists the vitality of any living thing by touch alone. If the mystic touches 

and is close by. another he learns of the target’s current injuries, Fatigue level, and 
whether it is currently afflicted by any poison or disease. The mystic 

DAaRrKk SiIgGhHTt is also aware of any form of life within a number of metres equal to 
Allows the mystic to ‘see’ normally in any level of limited light, his Willpower skill, which may make Stealth difficult to accomplish. 

even its complete absence. 
MAaGgIiCc SEenNSsEe 

DeenniiAaLl (X)) Similar to Life Sense but instead permits the mystic to detect 
The mystic can deny the effects of one specific environmental magical emanations over distance. If the mystic touches another he 

condition. Denial (Rain), for example, would keep the mystic dry learns of the target’s current magic points, carried enchantments, 
in even the most intense monsoon; Denial (Air) allows the mystic and active spells. 
to forgo breathing for an extended period; Denial (Falling) would 
allow the mystic to briefly levitate above the ground; Denial (Sun- NIigGhHTt SiIgGhHTt 
light) would prevent the burning, dehydrating effects of the most Allows the mystic to treat partial darkness as illuminated, and 

intense sun. darkness as partial darkness. 

EAaRrTthH SEenNSsEe PAaIinN COoNnTtRrOoLl 
The mystic has a perfect sense of direction, depth and orienta- The mystic is inured to pain and able to work through its effects. 

tion beneath ground, and suffers no penalties to Perception rolls for Endurance rolls when experiencing any kind of injury are consid- 

underground environments. ered to be automatic successes. 

EcHhOoLlOoCcAaTtIioOnN SPpIirRIitT SEenNSsEe 
The mystic senses his environment through reflections of sonic Similar to Life and Magic Sense, but the mystic’s senses are 

waves. This means that he can perceive others that may be either attenuated specifically to the activity of spirits and the spirit plane. 

motionless or hidden. In such circumstances, using a Stealth roll The mystic can sense what spirits are active within a radius equal to 

158



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM 

Mjuju’’s SaAgGaA 
Sent to spy on the nefarious Badoshi Warlords to assess their plans for 

war againstM eeros, Mju is attempting to sneak into their compound — a lofly 
valley fortress lugh in the Grey Peaks. Moving cautiously, he s traversing a 
long, hagh corridor which leads to the pleasure gardens of the inner courtyard, 
and needs to bypass the six alert guards waiting at the end of the passageway. 
Knowing that if he is seen he will be attacked, Mju considers hus options. 

Frst he invokes Adhesion which gives him the ability to traverse sheer sur- 
faces and ceilings. Mju immediately scuttles up the closest wall, and crouches, 
spider-like, on the ceiling, where none of the guards will think to look. Next 
he decides to boost hus Stealth by Intensity 2. Thus increases lus curcumstan- 
tial modifier from Standard to Very Good, doubling hus base Stealth skill to 
160%. 

He carefully manoewvres along the ceiling and the Games Master calls 
Jor a Stealth roll to gauge Mju’s progress. Luck is against him, and he rolls a 
96 which is an automatic failure. Even with their Perception skills suffering 
a 60% penally (from Mju’s augmented Stealth skill exceeding 100%), one 
of the guards notices somef alling grit dislodgedf rom the ceiling, looks up, and 
spots the skulking myst. 

Mju immediately leaps down behind the sentrees, diving into the luxuriant 
growth of the flowering gardens. Then in the few moments it takes for the 
Stunned guards to react, he stips into a waler lily covered pool. Knowing that 
the grounds will be thoroughly searched, Mju drops his Adhesion talent, free- 
ing up as much of hus meditative capacity as possible to enhance hus Fatigue 
by four levels, whilst still maintaining his augmented stealth. 

Three of the Badoshi arrwe to check the pool, remaining there_for over 
lwo manules lo ensure nobody is huding beneath the surface. Although Mju 
look a deep breath before immersing humself; he eventually runs out of aiy 
and soon burns through the extra Fatigue levels, almost drowning before the 

his Willpower in metres and, if he succeeds in an Insight roll, can guards leave lo search the rest of the garden. Now out of Magic Points, and in 

gauge the general intensity of the spirit entities. Spirit Sense confers serious jeopardy of capture or death, Myu stealthily flees the fortress, cursing 

no other powers or protection when dealing with spirits. uts bad stonemasonry... 

SqQUuEeEeZzEe 
FaAtTiIgGuUEe 

The mystic is able to manipulate his body, allowing him to 
Each point of Intensity negates a level of Fatigue. This attri- 

squeeze into recesses and through gaps that would otherwise be 
bute can be enhanced pre-emptively in anticipation of becoming 

impossible. The smallest opening, hollow or volume the mystic may 
fatigued. Thus a ‘fresh’ mystic who spends 6 Magic Points could 

utilise is one third of his SIZ. 
grant himself two buffer levels of Fatigue which could be lost before 
he started feeling the effects of his strenuous activity. 

EnNHhAaNnCcIinNGg ATtTtRrIiBbUuTtEeSs At the conclusion of the task any negated levels of fatigue return, 
Mystics can enhance an Attribute, temporarily increasing its potentially causing the mystic to collapse into unconsciousness. 

effectiveness. The following attributes can be enhanced in the ways 
described below. Luck Points and Experience Modifier cannot be HEeAaLlIinNgG RAaTtEe 
enhanced. Enhanced Healing Rate works slightly differently to the standard 

Attribute Enhancement rules. The amount of Hit Points healed is 
ACcTtIioOnN POoIiNnTtSs not increased, but the speed at which Healing Rate works is. Each 

Each level of intensity increases available Action Points by 1. level of intensity improves the speed of recovery by one step as 
The additional Action Points can only be used for defensive actions follows 
in combat. Thus, a mystic who spends 6 Magic Points to enhance 
his Action Points from 3 to 5 may only use these additional Action & Combat Rounds 

Points to Parry or Evade. He cannot use the additional points to & Minutes 

make additional attacks or cast additional magic. & Hours 

& Days 

DAaMmAaGgEe MOoDIdFifIiEeRr & Weeks 

Each point of Intensity increases the Damage Modifier by one &« Months 

step. Thus, at Intensity 3 (for a cost of 9 Magic Points, if available) a 
Usually Minor Wounds heal at a rate of 1 Day, Serious Wounds 

mystic’s Damage Modifier of +1d2 would increase to +1d8. 
at a rate of 1 Week, and Major Wounds at a rate of 1 Month. Each 
level of Intensity changes the speed of healing. Thus, at Intensity 

159



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM 

2, hit points are recovered at the following speeds: Minor Wounds Above: The fabled Floating Citadels of the Azure Mystics. These sages 
1 Minute, Serious Wounds 1 hour, and Major Wounds 1 day. specialise i the Adjuration of the Physwal Earth, focusing on the Denial 
Enhanced Healing Rate rapidly speeds-up recovery but it will not of Gravity. Through their advanced state of enlightenment the Azure Mys- 
reattach severed limbs or restore the use of maimed ones. tics have been able to raise their monastery citadels into the skies. They drift 
A mystic may remain in a healing trance for as long as it takes amongst the clouds covering many leagues a day in unguided flight, going 

to fully recover. However he may perform no other tasks during this wherever the air currents dictate. 
time. 

HiiTt POoIiNnTtSs 
Each level of Intensity boosts Hit Points in every location by 1. 

So an Intensity 4 Hit Point enhancement would raise all Hit Loca- 
tions by 4 points. These additional Hit Points absorb damage first, 
before the natural Hit Points are affected. 

However these temporary Hit Points do not change the Serious 
and Major Wound boundaries, which remain tied to the mystic’s 
natural Hit Points. Enhancing Hit Points after a Serious or Major 
Wound is suffered does not permit damaged locations to return to 
functionality. 

MOoVvEeMmEeNnTt RAaTtEe 
Fach level of Intensity increases Movement by 2 metres. 

InNIitTiIaAtTIivVeE 
Each level of Intensity adds 2 to the Initiative roll. 

160



