Mythras:  Sorcery

=% X o2 M K GO F m KT K = I R UL I < < | 

Sorcery
YL 
B oy 

| U G S [ R L L= = 1 1 I & KB A B« 7 o XN 

orcery is the technique of invoking magical effects through the 
understanding and application of transcendent knowledge. MAaNnIPipUuLlAaTtIinNgG 

S Once a sorcerer comprehends the objective rules of reality, 
they can employ them in a repeatable and methodical manner. Of tThHEe COoSsmMOoSs 
course this does not mean a sorcerer can figure out these funda- The practice of sorcery requires two core skills, Invocation and 

mental laws for themselves, only that once a technique or formula is Shaping. Invocation reflects the depth of knowledge concerning a 

learned, they can manipulate it in a variety of ingenious ways. particular philosophy or school of sorcery; whilst Shaping is the skill 

The path of sorcery is often a hard one, requiring much time of the sorcerer to manipulate the parameters of a spell, so that can 

spent in study and research. Even its reputation can be viewed with be cast in a flexible and innovative manner. 

an element of suspicion when compared to the worship of com- 
munal gods or the veneration of tribal spirits; as those not privy to InNvoOcAaTtIioOnN (IINNT x2) 
its secrets tend to regard it with jealousy or perhaps fear, especially Invocation represents a sorcerer’s ability to successfully cast spells 
when the sorcerer is an aloof recluse without need for or responsibil- learned from a particular source, be that a grimoire, mentor, school, 
ity towards his community. extra-planar demon or even an ancient artefact. The precise scope 

Not all practitioners are loners. Some take apprentices to pass on 
of what the skill covers depends upon the campaign setting, but each 

the art to those of the next generation, whilst others form schools 
incidence of Invocation must be assigned to a specific type or well- 

or guilds in which they share their knowledge in return for mutual spring of sorcery. 
protection or a degree of respectability. More sophisticated societ- The skill encompasses a plethora of magical principles from 
ies often evolve specialised orders, utilising their unions to practice comprehending the philosophy underlying how that type of sorcery 
particular types of sorcery as a profession, from itinerant weath- works; to being able to achieve the necessary mental state to manip- 
er-workers to mercenary spell-swords. At its pinnacle, sorcery can ulate reality. As the value of this skill increases, so does the capability 
even be used to shield nations from more ‘primitive’ forms of magic, of the sorcerer to create greater changes. 
or provide an increase to the standard of living by the maintenance The Intensity of a sorcery spell is equal to one tenth of the Invo- 
of innovative enchantments. 

cation skill used to cast it. 
Whilst the ability to cast sorcery, depending on the campaign 

setting, may be limited to those born to it or trained in the art from 
childhood, each sorcery spell is merely an invocation which can be ShHAaPpIinNgG (IINNTT++PPOOW)) 
mastered by those sorcerers willing to spend the time to grasp its In their default form, sorcery spells are relatively feeble in scope. 

philosophical meanings, or at least to memorise the methodology. Shaping is the method used to change the parameters of a sorcery 

As such, most orders of sorcery keep the secrets of their most potent spell so that it can be wrought to meet certain requirements, such as 

magics well hidden, even to their own students, for fear of the spell’s increasing its range or duration. 

power being abused, or corrupting its wielder. Once the base concepts of Shaping are known, they can be 

Although sorcery is often viewed as a dark or evil in Sword & applied to any spell known by the sorcerer; no matter its school or 

Sorcery literature, it need not necessarily be so. Sorcery can be used tradition. Thus sorcerers normally need only learn a single Shaping 

beneficently or play a key role in societies lacking other forms of skill (see Restricting Components of Sorcery Spells page 165). 

magic, depending on the manner in which the Games Master wishes Shaping is never rolled against when casting sorcery, rather it 

to present it. acts like a governor to limit the degree of modification which can be 
applied to a spell. The maximum level of alteration is equal to one 

161

Iv] 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

tenth of the value of the Shaping skill. Thus a sorcerer with Shaping DuuRraATtiIoOnN 
47% would be able to apply 5 points to shape the parameters of any Sorcery spells have a default duration equal to the POW of the 
sorcery spell he cast. caster in minutes. 

These points may be divided up amongst any of the following Applying one or more points of Shaping to the Duration com- 
components to optimise the spell as desired: ponent will extend the length of a sorcery spell as noted in the table. 

The spell remains running for the entire duration, although in some 
& Combine: Used to fuse together several spells into a single 

cases part of its effect may require active concentration to function 
casting 

(see Concentration page 166). 
& Duration: Used to extend the period of time the spell’s effects 

Some spells may end up with an extended duration which can 
last 

last hours, or even longer. In these cases the Magic Point Attribute of 
& Magnitude: Used to penetrate magical defences or resist mag- 

the sorcerer is temporarily reduced by the number of Magic Points 
ical attacks 

used to cast that spell until the magic is dropped or expires. 
& Range: Used to increase the distance a spell can be cast over 
& Targets: Used to increase the number of targets affected by 

MAaGgNnIiTtUuDdEe 
the spell 

Sorcery spells have a default Magnitude of 1, making them weak 
and vulnerable. 

COoMmBbIiNnEe Applying one or more points of Shaping to the Magnitude com- 
This component permits the sorcerer to combine the effects of ponent will improve its ability to overwhelm magical defences or 

several sorcery spells into a single casting, so that they all affect the resist magical attacks. It has no effect on the Intensity of a sorcery 
target simultaneously. This not only saves time on casting, but also spell which is solely based upon the caster’s Invocation skill. 
preserves Magic Points, as all the conjoined spells share the same 
shaping components (see Invocation Costs page 165). Use the fol- RAaNnGgEe 
lowing guidelines when combining spells: Sorcery spells have a default Range of Touch, requiring that the 

recipient be within physical reach of the caster. 
& A spell may not be combined with another instance of itself; Applying one or more points of Shaping to the Range compo- 

only different spells may be combined nent will allow the spell to be cast over greater distances, potentially 
& If the conjoined spells come from different sources, then the achieving ranges beyond the immediate perception of the caster. In 

lowest Invocation skill is used as the base casting chance such cases the sorcerer will need alternate methods of observing the 
& The conjoined spells must all share the same target or targets target. 
& Any shaping applied to a combined casting is assigned to Sorcery spells limited to Touch range may only be cast on oth- 

cach, and every one of the spells involved at no extra Magic ers if physical contact can be maintained for the entirety of the 
Point cost Invocation. 

& Fach additional spell added using combine, costs one extra Once someone or something is affected by a sorcery spell, it 
Magic Point and increases the difficulty grade of the Invoca- continues even if they travel beyond the spell’s Range. Spells which 
tion roll by one step (see Focus page 165) require Concentration (see page 166) lapse into passive mode once 

the target exceeds this distance, but only for the period it remains 
Although combined spells might require several different resis- 

beyond the Range limit. 
tance checks, the target only makes a single resistance roll — the 
result matched against each requisite opposed skill. Thus it is per- 

TAaRrGgEeTtSs 
fectly possible, for example, to save against all the combined spells 

Sorcery spells have a default Target of one object, creature or 
requiring Resist Endurance whilst simultaneously failing to throw 

person, which may be the caster himself. 
off the Resist Willpower spells. 

ShHAaPpIinNgG TAaBbLlEe 

Points of Shaping Combine Duration (Mins) Magnitude Range Targets 

None None POW 1 Touch 1 

1 2 Spells 2xPOW 2 Im x POW 2 

2 3 Spells 3xPOW 3 5m x POW 3 

3 4 Spells 4xPOW 4 10m x POW 4 

4 5 Spells 5xPOW 5 50m x POW 5 

5 6 Spells 6xPOW 6 100m x POW 6 

6 7 Spells 7xPOW 7 500m x POW 7 

7 8 Spells 8xPOW 8 lkm x POW 8 

8 9 Spells 9xPOW 9 5km x POW 9 

9 10 Spells 10xPOW 10 10km x POW 10 

10 11 Spells 11 x POW 11 15km xPOW 11 

Each point... +1 Spell +1 x POW +1 Magnitude +5km x POW +1 

162



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

FuURrTthHEeRr EXxTteEnNDdIinNgG DUuRrAaTtIioOnN ScChHOoOoLlSs AanNDd SPpEeLlLlSs 
Some Games Masters may_find the duration of sorcery to be too lim- A sorcerer’s power and spells are restricted to the particular phi- 

utedfor how magic works in their campaign setting The_following alter- losophy or tradition of sorcery he studies. Named schools of sorcery, 

native progression s offered to those that like to greatly extend the active the term represents a collated body of knowledge rather than a for- 

¢ffects of spells. Bear in mind however that until a sorcery spell hasf inally mal organisation. 

completed, the Magic Points used to cast it do not recover: Access to a specific school of sorcery can be held by particu- 
lar groups, individuals, objects or even locations. Thus a sorcery 

Points of Shaping Duration tradition need not necessarily be taught by a formal cult, rather it 
can potentially be self-learned if the sorcerer can comprehend the 

None Caster’s POW in Turns 
source for himself. 

1 Caster’s POW in Rounds 
For instance a sorcery cult could be nothing more than a group 

2 Caster’s POW in Minutes 
of loosely affiliated wizards who are all aware, and make use of a 

3 Caster’s POW x 5 Minutes particular source; an infamous tome such as the Scroll of Khronus 
4 Caster’s POW x 15 Minutes or the psychic powers gained by inhaling the deadly narcotic smoke 
5 Caster’s POW x Hours of the ebony lotus; some discovering the secrets by themselves, oth- 
6 Caster’s POW x 6 Hours ers guided by a mentor already privy to the knowledge. 

7 Caster’s POW x Days In a similar vein, there are no preset limitations as to how many 

8 Caster’s POW x Weeks spells are available to a particular school of sorcery. Yet the spells 
accessible to that philosophical path will generally be related in 

9 Caster’s POW x Months 
terms of metaphysical mechanics as to how they work, or will pos- 

10 Caster’s POW x Years 
sess similar supernatural effects. 

Each point... Continue progression: Decades, Centuries, 
For example the Stygian Path s a school of sorcery which specialises in 

Millennia, and so on... 
manipulating darkness, granting access to the spells: Animate Darkness, Dom- 
inate (Reptiles), Palsy, Sculpt Darkness, Smother, Teleport (via Shadows), and 

- 4 Wrack (Darkness). Whereas the Masters of Metamorphosts may learn a school 
of sorcery that controls the changing of things using the spells: Abjure,Diminish, 
Enhance, Haste, Regenerate, Shapechange and Transmogrify. 

SoOUuRrCcEeSs oOFf KNnOoWwLlEeDdGgEe With this in mind, schools of sorcery should be crafted to fulfil 

The fundamentals of sorcery are as varied as the sources_from which a particular concept. They need not be balanced with one another; 

uts knowledge can be learned. All depends entirely on who, or what, has corrupt diabolic cults might indeed offer more spells than their 

preserved such arcane knowledge. Although sorcery is oflen tied to the benevolent counterparts. A grimoire might only grant a single, albeit 

archetype of reading cryptic old spellbooks, it need not have any relation- potent, spell; whereas a respected guild of sorcery could provide a 

ship with that particular stereoty pe. dozen. The precise balance or lack thereof is for the Games Master 

Sorcery maght instead be recorded in theform of towering prehustoric to decide when designing his campaign. 

pictograms carved into the sudes of mountains or be accessible only to those Further consideration should be made towards whether a sor- 

that drink the waters of a legendary well. Perhaps only those thatjourney cerer can join several guilds or discover additional sources of arcane 
beyond the boundaries of reality can master its esoteric secrets. knowledge. MYTHRAS is not predisposed towards the limitless accu- 

Of course the theory and practice of sorcery can be passed on by living mulation of innumerable spells, but rather the clever and innovative 

beings too, without need_for books or artefacts. Lone masters might hand use of a few. However, this should not preclude such occurrences if 
down their sagacity as ancient aural traditions to their students. Maybe that is what is desired. 

such wasdom us held only by demons or spirits of the otherworld, which 
must be summoned and appeased before they teach those who dare to call STtaARrTtIinNgG SOoRrCcEeRrEeRrSs 
them up. Sorcery could even be learned by listening to the hidden meanings 

A character starting the game as a sorcerer should choose a sin- 
of mournful hyena howls around campfires at might. 

gle school of sorcery to study; one designed by the Games Master, 
Infinite are the sources of sorcerous knowledge. The only limat is your 

agreed to between the player and Games Master, or chosen from the 
imagination. 

examples given in these rules or the relevant setting. Only one school 
- 4 of sorcery can be chosen at this stage but others can potentially be 

Applying one or more points of Shaping to the Targets compo- discovered during the course of play. 

nent will allow the spell to affect an increasing number of multiple In addition, the source of this sorcery should be decided also; 

targets, each one receiving the full consequence of the magic. That whether it is an object, a mentor or a cult. There is no penalty to 

is to say, each target receives an identical copy of the original spell. being self-taught, a common conceit of the Sword & Sorcery genre. 

Unless specifically permitted by its description, the targets of a Sorcerer characters begin with a number of spells from that 

spell may not be changed once it is cast. school equal to one twentieth of their Invocation skill. Once the 
campaign starts they are restricted in what additional spells they can 
study, and when they can learn them. 

163



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

KRrAaTtOoSs’’ SaAgGaA of advancing cult rank or even as the result of many months 

Kratos started out as a modest scribe in thefamed city of Meeros. Unfor- research and study. When knowledge is quite literally power, a sor- 

tunately, hus increasing interest in the arcane arts soon brought him into conflict cerer should not be able simply to purchase spells by handing over 

with the cult priests of Myceras, who exiled him on suspicion of stealing a cartload of silver. Although a gift might influence the mind of a 

Jorbidden texts. The scholar swore vengeance towards the city of hus birth and sorcerer’s mentor, the spell itself is almost always priceless. 

Journeyedf ar into unknown lands in search of true power: 
Ultimately Kratos found an old hag who taught kim the_fundamentals of 

sorcery n exchangefor certain... favowrs. After a year of subservience, suffer- USsIinNgG SoORrCcEeRrYy 
ing her horrible embraces, Kratos learnt the skills of Invocation (Stygian Path) 

Although sorcery is not necessarily the most potent type of 
32% and Shaping 33 %. Then, in a dastardly act of betrayal, he strangled 

supernatural power available to mortals, the ability of a sorcerer to 
his mentor; stealing the strange crystal which seemed to be the source of her 

shape his magic makes it extremely versatile. Sorcerers can weave a 
sorcerous knowledge. 

handful of awesome spells into a single, magic-efficient casting; blast 
Alone in the wilderness, the sorcerer is discovered by a troop of man-eating 

small units of warriors with the same spell; or even control the mind 
centaurs. Faced with becoming their next meal, Kratos attempts to invoke a 

of a victim from hundreds of kilometres away. This ability, which 
spell to_frighten the monsters away. Lacking the skill to affect the centaurs 

greatly augments one or more spell components, enables their magic 
directly, he tries lo Animate the shadows dancing about hus camp fire. 

to far exceed the more rigid parameters of other types. 
With his Shaping skill he has four points he can use to manipulate the 

The inherent flexibility of sorcery extends beyond its ability to 
magic. He uses 1 pownt lo extend the Range of the spell to 16 metres, so that 

be shaped. Unlike animism there is no dependency upon third party 
it can reach the centaurs. The remaining 3 points he places into the Tar- 

spirits which might slip from control. Similarly they need not return 
gels component, so that he can simultaneously controlfour separate shadows. 

to specific holy places to recover their magical strength unlike theists. 
His invocation is successful so he sends the amorphous figures of flickering 

In effect, sorcery grants its practitioner freedom from needing things 
darkness towards the slavering man-horse chimeras. To his great surprise, the 

or places. All that is required is knowledge of the spell, and enough 
centaurs yell in superstitious terron; and prostrate themselves at his_feet begging 

Magic Points to invoke it. 
Jfor mercy... 

InNvVoOKkIinNgG Aa SPpEeLlLl 
LeEaArRnNIinNgG SPpEeLlLlSs Casting a sorcery spell requires that the sorcerer performs a short 

invocation, allowing him to mentally impose the spell’s transcenden- 
Learning new spells requires an investment of Experience Rolls 

tal formula upon the cosmos, changing reality. It may be an envi- 
as described in the Magic chapter on page 118. Whether or not 

sioning of a complex glyph or articulate utterance of a harmonic 
new spells are available is a different matter. For example, an adept 

mantra. Whatever the procedure, for the spell to work the sorcerer 
member of a powerful guild may be withheld from freely acquiring 

must meet the following prerequisites. 
the more dangerous spells of the order; only being taught once they 

Firstly they must actually know the spell being cast. Simply read- 
demonstrate the correct level of understanding or responsibility. A 

ing or repeating a spell parrot fashion from something like a scroll 
mage who learns his art from a demon might instead need to provide 

will not work if the sorcerer has no understanding of its underlying 
the entity with a suitable offering (a diabolical deed or rare sacrifice) 

metaphysics. 
before he is shown a new spell. 

Secondly they must have the requisite number of Magic Points 
Likewise a self-taught sorcerer who picks up a grimoire cannot 

remaining. Attempting to cast a spell with insufficient Magic Points 
learn every spell inscribed within its pages as soon as they have the 
Experience Rolls to invest. There are limits to how much, and how KRrAaTtOoSs’’ SaAgGaA 
quickly a sorcerer can understand and absorb knowledge from the Now in command of a troop of loyal centaurs, Rratos sends them forth 
complex metaphysical implications of such a work. lo gather tribute and sacrificial victims whilst he spends lus time studying the 

As a rough guideline, spells accessible to a school of sorcery are strange artefact he stole. He knows thef ist-sized black diamond was the source 
usually linked or entwined in such a way that they must be learned: of the hag’s sorcery, from the cold tingling the crystal elicits when he touches it. 

Some dim memory suggests that this may be the Tear of Yethis, an infamous 
& In a particular order; acquisition of lesser incantations being 

relic said to be the only remainingfragment of a mighty Serpent Demon who 
needed to comprehend the underlying techniques to invoke 

once ruled the world. 
higher ones. 

Afler much experimentation Kratos discovers that pouring fresh human 
& When a specific degree of mastery is reached, each spell lim- 

blood over the stone causes its holder to experience vivid dreams in which the 
ited to a particular cult rank or value of the Invocation skill 

demon lord appears, passing on_forbidden arcane knowledge to he who would 
may be learned as the sorcerer has demonstrated the neces- 

learn to master such power. As hus skill and arrogance increase, Kratos begins 
sary level of comprehension. 

lo demand new spells from his diabolical mentor. The demon slyly agrees, 
« Only after the student has shown the correct attitude, 

providing the sorcerer us willing to pay the hellish pruce. 
behaviour or dedication to be permitted deeper knowledge. 

In exchange for the ritual slaughter of nine pure virgins from the highest 
Thus the learning of new spells is not an automatic ability or rankedf amalies of Meeros, the demon promases to teach the increasingly cor- 

right. Access to them must be earned through roleplaying and over a rupt Kratos the magical ability to shift between pools of shadow. The sorcerer 
period of time in the campaign. A new spell should be regarded as a readily agrees, little comprehending that the next spell will cost him far; far 
reward for completing a particularly difficult task, as a consequence more. 

164



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

means that either the spell doesn’t work, or something bad occurs to 
the sorcerer to find the last fragments of power (see Running out of ALlTtEerRnNAaTtEe COoMmPpOoNnEeNnTtSs fFoOrR SoORrCcEeRrYy SPpEeLlLlSs 
Magic Points page 117). Other parameters can be added to Shaping, granting sorcery spells 

Thirdly on the last turn of casting, the sorcerer must pass an additional strange and exotic abilities. Some of these components are not 

Invocation skill check. Failing to cast the spell correctly usually strictly balanced with one another; so care should be taken if introducing 

results in nothing bad save that the magic doesn’t work, or at worst them to a campagn. 

the squandering of a few Magic Points. Ablation — Used with spells which have the Resist trait, each point of 
shaping applied to Ablation grinds down any protective magic on the target 
which tries to block the incoming spell; reducing its Magnatude by the level 

InNvVoOCcAaTtIioOnN COoSsTtSs of ablation. This is still the case even if the protective magic successfully 
The cost of casting a sorcery spell depends on how much it is blocked the sorcery spell. 

shaped, and the success level of the Invocation skill roll. Focus — Used to ensure that a spell works, no matter what the mental 
Base cost is 1 Magic Point plus an additional one point per spell and physical distractions, each point of shaping applied to Focus permuts 

component modified. For instance a spell which has its Range and the sorcerer to 1gnore one level of difficully applied against them. This cov- 
Duration components increased will have a base cost of 3 Magic ers the loss of verbal or somatic components, mental state due to narcotics, 
Points. If several spells are woven together using Combine, then an combining multiple spells, and even penalties appliedf or suffering wounds. 
additional Magic Point is added to the cost for each extra spell. T hus component cannot raise the casting chance above s base value. 

Once the base cost is known, the Invocation roll is made: Fortune — Used with spells which have the Resist traut, each point of 

& Critical Success: the spell works but only half the Magic Point shaping applied to Fortune allows an additional casting rollfrom which 
the sorcerer selects the most_favourable result. A spell cast with 3 points 

cost is expended. 
of shaping applied to Fortune would permat the sorcerer to rollfour times 

& Success: the spell works, and the full Magic Point cost is 
and choose the best roll. 

expended. 
Precision — Used with spells that randomly target Hut Locations, each 

& Failure: the spell fails, but no Magic Points are expended. 
point of shaping applied to Precision allows the caster to adjust the dice 

& Fumble: the spell fails, and the full Magic Point cost is 
10ll by 1 to select the most advantageous location. 

expended. 
Swifiness — Used to hasten the casting of complex or heavily manipu- 

lated spells, each point of shaping applied to Swifiness reduces the casting 
time by 1 Turn, to a minimum of one. 

InNvVoOCcAaTtIioOnN TIimMEe 
The time taken to cast a sorcery spell is equivalent to 1 Turn plus N ' 

an additional Turn for each spell component modified. This is usu- 
ally the same as its Magic Point cost except in cases where Combine DIiSsPpEeLlLliInNgG Aa SoORrCcEeRrYy SPpEeLlLl 
(or the optional Swiftness component) is utilised. Sorcery spells resist dispelling using their Magnitude. Thus if this 

The Invocation skill check is made on the final turn of casting; component is left unaugmented sorcery can be fairly easy to dismiss. 

the result of the roll occurring immediately. 

LIimMIitTaAtTiIoOnNSs oOFf SoORrCcEeRrYy 
MAaGgNnIiTtUuDdEe AanNDd InNTtEeNnSsIitTyY There are no restrictions to the number of concurrent spells a 

Sorcery spells have a default Intensity equal to one tenth of the sorcerer can maintain, save that only a single Concentration spell 

caster’s Invocation skill. Their Magnitude depends on how many can be focused on at any moment in time. 

shaping points were devoted to that spell component. Due to the boggling complexity of sorcerous invocations, there 

Sorcerers need not apply the entirety of their available Intensity is a limit to how many spells a sorcerer can keep in his mind. Thus 

if they desire to limit the spell’s effect. a sorcerer may only memorise a number of spells up to the value 
of his IN'T characteristic. In the rare situation that the sorcerer has 
access to more spells that he has the space to memorise them, spells 
may be swapped by spending a week of intense deliberation in reclu- 

REeSsTtRrIicCTtiInNgG COoMmPpOoNnEeNnTtSs oOFf SoORrCcEeRrYy SPpEeLlLlSs sive isolation to exchange them. 
Not all schools of sorcery need have access to the same component 

parameters, not even the default ones. A campaign could be created where 
certain paths of sorcery lack knowledge of a particular shaping technique, 
perhaps being compensatedf or by the addition of a different, more exotic SPpEeLlLl DEeSsCcRrIiPpTtIioOnNSs 
component. If used in this way, sorcerers should require a separate and All sorcery spells are defined by several traits which control how 

spectfic Shaping skillfor each type of Invocation they know. each spell functions. By design sorcery spells lack a degree of physi- 

The LZemgaran School of Unseen Sorcery for example could teach cal and temporal description since these parameters can be modified 

Shaping but using only the components of Magnitude, Range, Targets by Shaping as it is cast. 

and Focus. Whereas the Inebriated Sorcerers of ‘Tzushan may teach This flexibility can make certain spells appear to be remarkably 

their apprentices the components of Combine, Duration, Magnitude and potent, especially those which have their duration or range greatly 

Fortune. extended. Such possibilities are intentional, providing an interest- 
ing opportunity for those who wish to cunningly manipulate their 

N\ 4 magic. 

165



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

ABbJjuURrEe (SSuUbBsStTaAnNCcEe/PRrOoCcEeSsSs)) 
Resist (Special) 
Abjure allows the recipient of the spell to abstain from some- 

thing usually required for life, utterly removing its need (or effect) 
until the spell ends. Each variant of the spell affects a specific sub- 
stance or process, which could be anything, including Food, Water, 
Breath, Sleep, Dreams, Narcotics, and so on. Due to its flexibility, 
the Games Master should use common sense when more unusual 
versions of the spell are used, for example Abjure (Narcotics) will not 
only remove any desire to take narcotics in the first place, but also 
ensure any already taken will no longer affect the target. 

The sorcerer can affect targets with a maximum SIZ of three 
times the spell’s Intensity. If the recipient is unwilling they are per- 
mitted to resist using Willpower. Exceedingly rare and exotic ver- 
sions of this spell exist such as Abjure Pain, Abjure Sensory Percep- 
tion, and even Abjure Ageing. 

ANnIiMmAaTtEe (SSuUBbSstTaANnCcEe)) 
Concentration, Resust (Special) 
Animate quite literally invests an inanimate object with a sem- 

blance of life, permitting it to move under its own power. Each vari- 
ant of the spell affects a specific type of substance, which can be 
fairly broad in scope. For example wood, stone, fire, darkness, rope, 
fabric, and so on. 

The sorcerer can animate an object with a maximum SIZ of 
three times the spell’s Intensity. Insubstantial substances such as air, 
fire, darkness or clouds are instead measured in terms of volume, 
with the sorcerer able to affect a number of cubic metres equal to 
the spell’s Intensity. The animated object gains a default Movement 

Most potential game abuses are handled in the spell descriptions. 
Rate of 1m, which may be incremented by assigning points of 

However, Games Masters who find that certain spell combinations 
Intensity (on a one for one basis) to movement rather than to the 

are causing problems should feel free to impose extra restrictions 
amount of SIZ or Volume affected. 

— such as reducing spell functionality, preventing the same spells 
Providing they have some degree of flexibility or the ability to 

being available to a single school of sorcery, or using the same tactics extrude portions of themselves, animated objects may perform com- 
against the player characters. 

plex physical manipulations. These are performed by using the sor- 
The following two traits are available to sorcery spells: 

cerer’s own skills, reduced by one difficulty grade. If combined with 
the appropriate Sculpt spell (see Shaping), the sorcerer can achieve 

COoNnCcEeNnTtRrAaTtIioOnNnN 
much finer control and ignore this penalty. Where necessary, treat 

The spell’s active effects only function so long as the charac- 
ter specifically concentrates on it. During this time the sorcerer is 
usually restricted to moving at a maximum of walking pace, and To Rock AanNDd RoLlLl 
performing Free or Reactive Actions (when necessary; use common The material and shape of an object has important implications on 
sense). Any passive elements of the spell continue running without how the Animate spell is used. 
the need to concentrate; for example a Fly spell requires concentra- For instance, a sorcerer who knows Animate (Stone) 78 % could use it 
tion to actually move, but it will simply keep the sorcerer floating to move a boulder of up to SIZ 24 (a little over 200kg), but he couldn’t 
in place if his concentration lapses. By default a sorcerer may only affect a solid cliffface with a much larger size, nor could he break a lump 
concentrate on a single Concentration spell at any one time. Jfrom it unless the fault bines and cracks already existed. However, a more 

insubstantial material like water 15 easier to divide up, so there would be 
ReessiistT ((EEnNdDuURrAaNnCcEe/ WWIilLlLpPoOwWEeRr/EVvAaDdEe)) no problem splitting off a small pool of waterfrom a lake. 

Offensive spells allow the target to make an opposed test of Shape us also vital. Animating a boulder would allow it to ponder- 
their Endurance, Willpower or Evade skill (as specified by the spell) ously roll about, but it obviously could not pick up an object, open a door 
against the casting roll of the sorcerer, to avoid the effect of the spell (although it might be able to smash through i) or anything else which 
entirely. To resist using Evade, the character must expend a Combat required limbs or dugits to achieve. An animated statue on the other hand 
Action. would possess the requisite appendages. 

Some obyects may appear innocuous but can be potentially formidable 
Be warned that some of the following spells are extraordinarily powerful, in the right circumstances. An animated bunch of ropes or a carpet could 

included only for the use of major antagonusts or as long lost arcane secrets. They be an excellent way of entangling opponents, or an animated fire sent 
are extremely rare and not intendedf or starting player characters. dancing through a tent encampment a deadly distraction. 

N\ 4 

166



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

the object as having a Damage Bonus based on twice its SIZ, or as potentially be reflected back at its caster. The sorcery can only affect 
an elemental of equal volume. spells possessing the Resist trait which have a Magnitude equal to or 

Sorcerers must actively concentrate to cause animated objects less than the Magnitude of the Castback. 
to move or perform complex manipulation. If their concentration In such cases if the recipient of the Castback fails to resist the 
lapses the object becomes quiescent until the sorcerer can focus his incoming spell, then it affects him normally. If on the other hand he 
will through it again. Objects which are already under magical con- succeeds in resisting, the reflected spell is sent back to its caster who 
trol are only affected if the Magnitude of the Animate is equal or in turn must roll to see if he himself suffers its effects! 
greater than the previous effect. Castback has no way of discerning the difference between hostile 

If the animated object is carried or worn by a living creature, or beneficent magic, and affects all spells save those the target casts 
then it may resist the spell with Endurance. Whilst the spell can be on himself. 
used to discommode/break such objects, their manipulation cannot The recipient cannot exceed a maximum SIZ of three times the 
be used to directly inflict harm on the creature (see Shrink page 174). spell’s Intensity. 

ATtTtRrAaCcTt (ThHRrEeAaTt)) DAaMmAaGgEe EnNHhAaNnCcEeMmEeNnTt 
Resist (Willpower) Damage Enhancement augments the physical damage inflicted 
Attract makes the recipient of the spell a scapegoat for certain, by an object or creature. This can be anything from natural weap- 

and usually harmful, occurrences. Fach variant of the spell affects ons, a two handed axe or even the spikes of a pit trap. The magic 
a specific type of threat, for instance spells, creatures, spirits or even increases the minimum amount of damage that is inflicted during 
missiles. Often used as a punitive curse or self-sacrificial gesture a successful attack, raising it to the value of the spell’s Intensity if 
rather than an offensive weapon, Attract draws all incidences of the dice roll is lower. The spell cannot inflict more damage than the 
its particular threat which pass within a radius equal to the spell’s weapon is normally capable of. 
Intensity in metres, redirecting them so that they target the recipient 
instead. DAaMmAaGgEe REeSsIisStTaAnNcCEe 

The mechanical effects of the spell depend entirely upon the Damage Resistance protects an (entire) object or person against 

type of threat: physical damage. It provides the recipient with a number of Armour 
Points equal to the spell’s Intensity. These do not stack with existing 

& Creatures: Attracts aggressive beasts with a SIZ of up to three protection (whether worn or natural) so that only the highest value 
times the spell’s Intensity. protection works. 

& Magic: Atracts offensive ranged magic with a Magnitude This magic does not necessarily need only to be cast on living 
equal or less than the spell’s Intensity. creatures. It can just as easily be used to toughen a sword, make a 

& Missiles: Attracts ranged weapons with a maximum damage door more difficult to hack through, or render a delicate glass bottle 
(including magical augments) equal or less than the spell’s near unbreakable. The target cannot exceed a maximum SIZ of 
Intensity. three times the spell’s Intensity. 

& Spirits: Attracts aggressive spirits with a maximum Intensity 
of half the spell’s Intensity. DiimiiNniishH (CCHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCc)) 

Resist (Willpower/Endurance) 
Diminish allows a sorcerer to reduce a physical or mental trait 

BAaNnIiSshH 
of a living target. Each variant of the spell affects a specific char- 

Resist (Willpower) 
acteristic, diminishing it by 2 points per Intensity of the spell —to a 

Banish enables a sorcerer to dismiss a spiritual or demonic entity 
minimum of 1. The target must possess the characteristic in ques- 

with a maximum POW of three times the spell’s Intensity, back to 
tion to be effective. 

the Plane from whence it was summoned (or from which it travelled). 
If the target is unwilling it is permitted to resist the spell, using 

If the target is unwilling it is permitted to resist using Willpower. 
Endurance if the spell is affecting a physical characteristic (STR, 

This spell does not work on spirits which are residing within a 
CON, SIZ or DEX) or Willpower if affecting a mental one (INT, 

fetish to which they are bound. If brought forth from the object 
POW or CHA). Note that creatures affected by Diminish (SIZ) actu- 

to perform a service, however, the spirit becomes vulnerable to the 
ally shrink, rather than becoming wasted and skeletal as with the 

banishment; which if successful, sunders the binding. Likewise Ban- 
Tap spell. 

ish does not work on spirits currently possessing a victim, but only 
those which are tricked into abandoning the host first. 

DOoMmIiNnAaTtEe (CCRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs)) 
Concentration, Resust (Wallpower) 

ByPpAasss ARrMmOoUuRr 
Dominate grants the sorcerer psychic control over a creature of 

Bypass Armour affects objects, armaments or the natural weap- 
the specific species the spell affects. The spell is limited by the intel- 

ons of creatures so that they pass through armour. The spell allows 
lect of the target, the caster only able to subjugate creatures with an 

the weapon or trap to ignore a number of Armour Points equal to 
INT or INS up to twice the spell’s Intensity. Those that fall within 

the spell’s Intensity. This spell also works against magical protection, 
this range may resist with Willpower. 

such as Damage Resistance or Shield. 
Whilst the sorcerer concentrates, he may mentally issue com- 

CAaSsTtbBaAcCkK mands to the victim, who (in most circumstances) cannot refuse. If 

Castback shields the recipient from magic in a somewhat hap- the sorcerer allows his concentration to lapse, the victim temporarily 

hazard manner, with the chance that any spell cast at them may regains volition; at least until the next time the sorcerer re-establishes 

167



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

Kratos wields his Dominate (Reptiles) spell to command a lizardman raiding party of the Lo Swamps to serve him. With this subservient force, the sorcerer plans his revenge 

against Meeros. 

concentration. Dominate does not grant any awareness of what the The target of the spell may be an object, location or person — 
target is doing when beyond the perception of the sorcerer. In addi- although the latter, if unwilling, may also attempt to resist. If suc- 
tion, if the target escapes the Range of the spell they are freed from cessful the target throws off the curse, and the spell fails. 
control, although it can established again if they return. Although the magic may seem extremely potent, it is balanced 

Certain circumstances permit a new resistance roll to break the by the amount of time required to gather together creatures from 
spell, such as acts which run contrary to the target’s strongest beliefs overly long distances. In addition, interfering with nature on a wide 
or instincts, for example being forced to murder a loved one. In these scale often results in unforeseen (and dire) consequences. Thus Draw 
cases the subjugated victim may resist using a Passion, Oath or some is most often used for things like: pestering an individual with insects, 
similarly relevant skill. Suicidal commands instantly break the spell. clandestinely stealing an entire herd of cattle, or blighting a city with 

a plague of rats. 
DRrraAww (CCRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs)) 

Resust (Wallpower) EnNCchHAaNnTt (OOBbJjEeCcTt)) 
Draw summons creatures of a specific type within range towards Resist (Special) 

a target. Each variant of the spell affects a family of species, such Enchant enables a caster to make one of their sorcery spells ever- 
as fish, felines or birds. It affects creatures up to a maximum SIZ of lasting, but at the cost of seriously reducing their magical strength. 
three times the spell’s Intensity, which may resist the summons using Normally enchantments are bound into inanimate objects, some- 
Willpower. Those that fail are drawn towards the target, moving at a thing which will last beyond the life of the sorcerer, perhaps even 
natural speed suitable to that type of creature. becoming a legendary object. On the other hand a living target can 

Physical obstructions may prevent the creatures from reaching be enchanted, although the spell is often one of a deleterious nature. 
the desired location. Upon their arrival, some other magic must be A spell which is to be made perpetual must be Combined with 
used to control the creatures since Draw provides no protection or the casting of Enchant. In addition, it is limited to possessing only as 
domination against them. Aggressive species may potentially ram- many points of shaping as the Intensity of the Enchant. The strain 
page or mindlessly attack depending on their natural instincts. of creating the enchantment permanently reduces the sorcerer’s 

Magic Points attribute by the magic point cost of the combined spell. 
These can be recovered later if the enchantment is unwoven by the 

168



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

HY NCHANT? ENnSsLlAaVvEe (CCRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs)) 
Why Enchant?

Resist (Willpower) 
Few player character sorcerers are likely to create enchantments since 

Enslave grants the sorcerer power to manipulate large numbers 
the ultimate cost always comes from their own Magic Points attribute. 

of targets, all of whom must be of the same species as specified by 
Although it may seem foolish to enchant objects or people with permanent 

the spell. Instead of crushing the will of its victims, turning them 
spells due to this crippling reduction in power, there are some circumstances 

into helpless automatons (as per the Dominate spell), the magic 
where it can actually be a reasonable act. 

instils a powerful yet wholly artificial zeal or desire within those 
In magically poor settings, recovery of Magic Points may be slow and 

which it affects — giving them a temporary Passion at a value equal 
difficult. An enchanted object in this case, will actually save the sorcerer 

to the caster’s Invocation skill. This can be anything from devoted 
from expending power, especially of it is a spell which he uses regularly — a 

adoration towards the sorcerer to an unremitting hatred for a hith- 
canpet enchanted with Fly for instance. 

erto friendly nation. 
Progression in a magical guild or cult might require the creation of an 

The potential number of victims a sorcerer can Enslave is equal 
enchantment, a wizard’s staff” being a common concept. Combining this 

to ten times the Intensity of the spell, multiplied by its Targets com- 
with the right spell could create a dangerous weapon of sorcery (Wrack), 

ponent; thus if cast at Intensity 7 with four Targets, the spell will 
grant a supplementary pool of Magic Points (Store Manna), or some other 

actually attempt to affect 280 victims. These are normally gathered 
imaginative use. 

in a crowd or restricted area so that both the sorcerer can see them, 
Last but by no means least, a sorcerer can use an enchantment to bless 

and they can hear him. The sorcerer can only enslave creatures with 
or curse a victim with a persustent effect. A rather infamous example would 

an INT or INS up to twice the spell’s Intensity. Those that fail to 
be changing a prince into a baboon with a permanent Shapechange spell, 

resist will listen to the words of the sorcerer and be influenced by 
although with the right shaping entire cities could be damned with some 

them. 
nefarious sorcery. 

Whilst under the influence of this spell, victims cannot directly 

- 4 harm the caster, thinking him sacrosanct or a fount of wisdom. 
However they can baulk at a command if the order brings them 

original caster or the object (or person) is destroyed. Dismissing or 
into conflict with another Passion of equal or higher value. Enslave 

Neutralising an enchantment only suppresses its powers temporarily. 
is normally used by powerful sorcerers to raise armies, subjugate 

Itis recommended that only objects be permitted to be enchanted 
tribes or corrupt ruling bodies, enabling them to subtly seize power 

with spells requiring the Concentration trait. Enchantments should 
or ensure their own safety in an otherwise hostile society. 

be recorded with the Invocation skill of the enchanted spell at the 
time of its creation, along with whatever shaping was performed. 

Evoke 
EnNHhAaNnCcEe (CCHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCc)) Resust (Wallpower) 

Evoke brings an extra-planar being to the presence of the caster; 
Resist (Willpower/ Endurance) 

which can be anything from a demon or genie, to an intangible spirit. 
Enhance allows a sorcerer to increase a physical or mental trait 

The only requirements are that it cannot be native to the plane of 
of a target. It works in precisely the same way as Diminish, save that 

existence to which it is summoned, that it does not possess a POW 
it improves a specific characteristic, enhancing it by 2 points per 

greater than three times the spell’s Intensity, and that the sorcerer 
Intensity of the spell — to a maximum of twice the original charac- 

knows its true name. For some settings, each incidence of this spell 
teristic value. Malevolent use of the spell may be resisted. 

might be specific to a unique individual. 
Careful consideration should be taken before permitting charac- 

Although Evoke may summon the entity, it does not grant him 
ters access to certain versions of this spell, such as Enhance (DEX, 

any power over the extra-planar being. Unless some sort of magical 
INT or POW), due to the potentially unbalancing nature of these 

protection or compulsion is used, the sorcerer is completely at the 
spells. 

mercy of the entity, relying on ritual tradition or good nature. Of 

ENnLlAaRrGgEe 
Resust (Special) SuUmMMmOoNnIiNnGg OTtHhEeRrWwOoRrLlDd ENnTtIiTtIiEeSs 
Enlarge is the opposite of the Shrink spell. It is used to expand Using Evoke to summon entities from other worlds or dimensions us 

non-living or inanimate objects, the initial SIZ of which cannot one of those spells which, according to the genre, commonly requires a 
exceed a maximum of three times the spell’s Intensity. Under its great deal of preparation as described in the Introduction to Magic chapter 
effect, the dimensions and weight of the object are multiplied by a (see Ritualistic Casting Times page 115). 
factor equal to the Intensity. For instance a plank of wood subject to 1In this particular case, the Games Master could require that the initial 
an Intensity 7 Enlarge spell it would grow to seven times its length summoning of the entily requires roleplaying a long drawn out ritual, with 
and mass, possibly allowing it to form a bridge. JSfull descriptions of the laying down of protective wards, and any required 

Normally objects cannot resist the magic, but if it is carried or sacrifices. Then, assuming the summoned creature doesn’t just destroy the 
worn by a living creature, then the victim may resist the spell with sorcerer or drag him back to its own realm, some form of negotiation 
Endurance. Used offensively in this way, the creature has the chance should take placefor future services. 
to brace itself or simply drop the object as it expands. Thus whilst Once thus deal is struck the entity could be allowed to return home, 
having a suit of mail grow to five times bigger and heavier may be a ready to respond the next time it is called by the Evoke spell. However, 
hindering inconvenience, it will not cause direct harm. Additionally, these_future summonings merely require the sorcerer to call out the being’s 
an object will stop growing when it meets too much resistance. name whilst casting the spell, allowing it to respond near instantaneously. 

- 4 

169



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

course the being may not necessarily attack or punish its summoner, HIinNDdEeRr 
but few are happy about being yanked from their native plane with- Resust (Endurance) 
out some sort of suitable raison d’étre or a gift to smooth ruffled Hinder reduces the Movement Rate of whatever itis cast on, in a 
feelings. similar manner to Haste. The spell can affect targets of up to a max- 

Summoned entities only remain in the world for as long as the imum SIZ of three times the spell’s Intensity. Those that fail to resist 
Duration of the spell. In addition they cannot travel further from the are slowed by a number of metres equal to the Intensity. However, a 
place of their summoning than the spell’s Range. target’s Movement Rate cannot be lowered to less than 1 metre per 

round with this spell. 
Frly 

Concentration HooOLldDFfaASsTt 
Fly enables the recipient to move freely through the air at their Resust (Endurance) 

own behest. The spell can affect a person, creature or object of a SIZ Holdfast magically adheres an object (of a SIZ up to three times 
up to three times its Intensity, granting them a base Movement Rate the spell’s Intensity) to another surface. The bonding is unbreakable 
of 6. Further levels of Intensity not allocated to SIZ can instead be by normal means, save for the destruction of the target or the sur- 
used to augment the speed of flight, each point granting an addi- face it is bonded to. It can only be dispelled by magic if the counter 
tional 6 metres per round. For instance an Intensity 7 Fly spell could spell can overcome the Magnitude of the Holdfast. 
grant a SIZ 14 creature a Movement Rate whilst flying of 18. The materials of the two surfaces make no difference to the 

Fly requires concentration only when actively moving. If concen- spell. However, if the target is a living being, it is permitted to resist 
tration lapses the magic continues, keeping the recipient hovering using its Endurance. This magic is often used to seal doors into 
aloft; although if travelling at high speed it might take a round or their frames, stick weapons into scabbards, or even fasten thieves to 
two to coast to a stop. objects they were trying to steal! 

If the spell is used on a beast of burden or an object used to sup- 
port others (such as a carpet) it must be capable of lifting the com- ImMPpRrIisSoOnN 
bined SIZ of both the creature or object, and those mounted upon Resist (Willpower) 
it. Otherwise it either fails to take off, or sinks towards the ground at Imprison creates an invisible barrier around a person or creature, 
a rate deemed fitting by the Games Master. blocking it from leaving the area. The magic only affects corporeal 

beings with a maximum POW or SIZ of up to three times the spell’s 
HAaSsTtEe Intensity. If either characteristic exceeds the limit the spell fails. The 

Haste augments the Movement Rate of whatever it is cast on, imprisoned creature is permitted a single chance to resist. If they 
whether a person, creature or object. The spell can affect targets up successfully overcome the magic, they can escape. 
to a maximum SIZ of three times the Intensity of the spell. Under Depending on the setting, Imprison may require the area of the 
its effect, the recipient’s Movement Rate is increased by an amount imprisonment to be pre-prepared with use of powders, glyphs or 
equal to the Intensity. If the target is an inanimate object, it increases geometric designs. It is often combined with the Evoke spell to pro- 
the top speed of the vehicle or vessel, but does not provide motive vide some degree of protection when summoning hostile entities. 
power. 

InNtTuUIitTiIoOnN 
HiiDdEe LifFe Concentration, Resust (Wallpower) 

Hide Life conceals the recipient’s soul in a specially prepared Intuition permits the sorcerer to discern the true emotions and 
object called a soul jar, which can take any form the caster desires. motives of the target, as if he had made a successful Insight roll. 
It works only on targets with a maximum POW of up to twice the The spell can only affect targets with an INT up to twice its Inten- 
Intensity of the spell. Under its effects the recipient loses a single Hit sity. Although the magic allows a deeper awareness of psychological 
Point from every location, but in exchange cannot be killed. Fach state, it does not enable the sorcerer to read memories or guarded 
time they suffer an injury, affliction or spell which would normally thoughts. Targets who are aware of the spell may try to veil their 
slay them, at the moment of death their body discorporates and feelings, gaining another resistance roll against the caster’s Invoca- 
reforms next to the object in which the life force is stored. tion skill, each time they try to deflect the sorcerer’s probing. 

It takes the body a period of one month divided by the Intensity 
of the spell to fully reform and heal. Conversely, if the recipient MAaRrKk 
ventures further away from its soul jar than the Range of the spell, it Resist (Willpower) 
begins to degenerate, suffering damage in reverse. Dying beyond the Mark is used to magically tag an object with a mystical sigil, so 
reach of the spell is permanent. that it may be located, summoned or even targeted by another spell 

Hide Life can be dismissed or neutralised, but requires the count- without being in range of the caster’s perception. The magic can 
er-magic to be cast directly onto the soul jar, which is normally well mark an object of a SIZ up to three times the spell’s Intensity. Whilst 
hidden or protected. The only other way of ending the spell is to the caster is within the Range of the spell, he is aware of the object’s 
smash the object itself, which may prove hard if it is carved or fash- distance and direction. Whether or not the magical mark is visible 
ioned out of exceptionally durable material. Although Hide Life depends on the setting, but once placed it cannot be removed until 
prevents death, it does not cease ageing, as many sorcerers who later the spell ends. If cast upon a living creature, it may attempt to resist 
become withered liches have discovered to their cost. the effects of the spell. 

170



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

MyyssTtiic (SeEnNSsEe)) PhHAanNtToOmM (SSeEnNSsEe) 
Concentration Concentration, Resust (Special) 
Mystic (Sense) enables the caster to perceive magic using the Phantom produces an illusory effect on a target, tailored to fool a 

sense of perception as specified by the spell. This could take the specific sense. There are many versions of this spell, each one affect- 
form of seeing auras, hearing faint tinkling, smelling peculiar scents ing a different type of perception. The most common are used to 
or even feeling his skin crawl. subvert sight, sound, smell, taste and touch; but others exist to fool 

Due to the diversity of senses, the magical object need not be in more exotic senses such as temperature, magic or emotion. Several 
direct perception, but less precise sensory methods may make it dif- phantasm spells can be woven together to form a single illusion, 
ficult exactly to locate the source. The power of Mystic (Sense) per- using the Combine component. 
mits it to extend into alternate planes, for example the Spirit World, Illusions produced by the Phantom spell confuse the senses of 
if such exist in the setting. those who interact with them, but do not change the underlying 

The sorcerer will be able roughly to judge the Magic Points reality hidden beneath. As such, phantasms cannot inflict direct 
of objects and people to within 1d3 points. If observing a spell or harm, but can be indirectly dangerous. For example a visual illusion 
enchantment with an Intensity equal or less than that of the sorcer- of a paved floor could hide the existence of a spiked pit beneath it, 
er’s Mystic (Sense), he may discern what the type of magic (Theistic, or the smell and taste of a deadly acid could be hidden under the 
Mystic, etc), what it does, and the unique signature of whichever illusory bouquet of fine wine. 
cult, guild or tradition cast it — or if already a member of that group, Of course, illusions need not be used to hide danger but could 
the individual. intimidate or bluff instead. The same visual illusion could make a 

pony appear to be a deadly sabre-toothed tiger, or turn the rags of a 
NEeUuTtRrAaLlIiSsEe MAaGgIiCc beggar into princely robes. 

Neutralise Magic suppresses a single spell or miracle on a target, Detecting an illusion is not normally permitted unless the 
with a Magnitude equal or less than its own. The magic is negated observer has good reason to question its validity. The audible and 
only as long as the Duration of Neutralise Magic, which in most visual phantasm of a tiger cast on a pony will fool almost anyone, yet 
cases is more than enough time for the targeted spell to expire. a dog witnessing the same illusion would notice that the tiger smelled 
Magic with a longer duration reinstates itself when Neutralise ends, very strongly of horse, and would have a strong suspicion that it was 
thus it cannot be used to permanently negate long-running curses or not all it seemed. In such cases the observer may attempt to resist 
break enchantments for example, but could be used to briefly bring using their Willpower against the Invocation skill of the caster. Resis- 
relief or bypass them. tance rolls are also permitted if the phantasm attempts to aggres- 

If used against spells or miracles which specifically protect against sively overwhelm those subject to its illusory effects (see below). 
magic (such as Spell Protection or Reflect), Neutralise Magic takes Phantasms can react to their surroundings provided the sorcerer 
precedence in those situations when the Magnitude of both is equal. concentrates on the spell. If the caster’s attention lapses the illusion 

Neutralise Magic can be used defensively to negate incoming enters a relatively static standby mode, still operant but not longer 
spells using the Counter Spell reactive action. It affects targets with dynamically responding to the environment; so background noises, 
a SIZ up to three times the Intensity of the spell. scents and such like rarely need to be concentrated on. 

Tor instance casting the phantasm of a tiger out of thin air 
PAaLlsy 

would require the caster to concentrate to make it move or respond 
Resist (Endurance) 

to attacks; whereas casting the same phantasm on the pony would 
Palsy renders a single random Hit Location on the target com- need no concentration, since all he has done is changed its external 

pletely useless, the affected area twitching and unresponsive. The 
appearance, and the animal will move by itself — although cropping 

precise effect depends on the location struck. Being hit in the head 
grass and fleeing at the first sign of danger might be giveaways. 

causes the victim to become completely incapacitated, the chest 
Phantom can only be used to replicate senses and memories pre- 

results in paralysis from the neck down, the abdomen paralysis from 
viously experienced by the caster, or things he can mentally imagine. 

the waist down, and a limb simply ceases functioning. Thus a sorcerer could create some horrific looking monster with a 
The spell cannot affect Hit Locations which normally possess Hit 

hundred eyes, but correctly mimicking the taste of Fireberry Juice 
Points greater than the Palsy’s Intensity. Nor can a single casting of 

may be beyond his ability if he hasn’t already sampled it. Such 
the spell be used to target multiple locations on the same victim. 

minor oversights are often a good way of recognising phantasms. 
The following guidelines are provided to help judge the effects of 

PEeRrCcEeIivVEe (SeEnNSsEe) 
particular sensory illusions: 

Resist (Endurance) 
Perceive grants the recipient a new and unusual sensory percep- 

SiIgGhHTt 
tion. This could be anything from Echolocation to X-Ray Vision. 

Creates a visible yet non-corporeal illusion which cannot exceed 
The recipient cannot exceed a SIZ more than three times the spell’s 

a length, height or width of more than the Intensity of the spell in 
Intensity and if unwilling, may resist. Each version of the spell 

metres. This can range from simply changing the colour of a door to 
relates to a single unique sense, which can be made up by the Games creating a carpet of aggressive, multicoloured snakes which continu- 
Master or chosen from the Creature Traits table. ally wriggle over each other. If used subtly; a visual illusion can help 

Depending on the setting, the spell may strangely mutate existing disguise the true appearance of an object or creature, changing skin 
Sensory organs, or grow exotic new ones, such as giant bat-like ears, tones or the pattern of clothing, Creating a fabrication completely 
delicate antennae or even glowing slit eyes — potentially causing dis- out of context with the setting allows the viewer a chance to resist, 
trust, fear or nausea to observers. 

171



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

as does physically interacting with it. Animate illusionary creatures However, the portal only remains open for as long as the sorcerer 
use the relevant skills of the sorcerer to perform physical actions; for concentrates. If his attention lapses, the portal remains in place, but 
example, an illusionary giant spider attempting to avoid a thrown is impassable. 
javelin would use the sorcerer’s own Evade skill to scuttle clear. The appearance of the portal usually depends on the setting. 

Games Masters should decide whether a portal terminus can be 
SmMEeLlLl placed blindly, whether it relies on close personal familiarity with 

Reproduces any single scent of something, from a pleasant per- the chosen location, or requires use of other magic such as Project 
fume to the stench of vomit or the smell of cut grass to freshly cooked (Sense) or Mark. 
food. The illusory scent has a detectable radius in metres (to humans Conversely portals may require a specially enchanted spot or 
at least) equal to the Intensity of the spell. When used creatively, the object to function, such as a set of standing stones. Another consid- 
smell can drive off those who find the odour unpleasant, or cause eration is whether sensory information can pass through the portal 
them to involuntarily gag or choke. Conversely the scent might draw as if it were a window to another place, or if the surface remains 
the attention of persons or creatures who find it attractive. mysteriously opaque. 

SoOuUnNDd PRrOoJjEecCTt (SeEnNSsEe)) 
Generates an audible illusion, anything from a faint, distract- Concentration 

ing whisper to an overwhelming clap of thunder. The sorcerer can Project allows the recipient to send one of his senses beyond his 
influence the nature and volume of the sound so long as he con- body in the form of an astral projection. This discorporated ‘recep- 
tinues to concentrate upon it. Although very loud sounds can be tor’ is both invisible and intangible, permitting it to travel anywhere 
produced, the illusion cannot cause permanent deafhess or damage. with no chance of observation save for those with magical percep- 
On the other hand the volume can be high enough to interfere with tion. Each individual Project spell relates to a specific sense, which 
verbal communication, or hide the sounds of other things happen- is not necessarily limited to just human perceptions. A sorcerer who 
ing. Treat the volume to be equal to ten times the Intensity on the knows several of these spells can Combine them together, clairvoy- 
Decibel scale. Any task which requires hearing one’s own voice or ance and clairaudience for example. 
maintaining concentration (such as spell casting), can attempt to Wherever the projected sense travels, it relays back its particular 
resist, or suffer the usual consequences. sensory information, allowing the recipient to see, listen, touch or so 

on via the receptor. Whilst one of his senses is projected in this way, 
TAasTtEe 

the recipient can no longer use it with his physical body. So a sor- 
Produces any taste the sorcerer has previously encountered, from 

cerer who projects his hearing off to a distant location becomes deaf 
the most subtle of flavourings to mouth fouling tangs. The target of 

until the spell ends or he brings the projected sense back. 
this spell need not just be food or drink, although that it is primary Concentration is required for two aspects of the spell: moving 
focus. It can be used to make the skin of a lover taste like lemon zest the astral receptor, and attempting a Perception check with the pro- 
or be applied to a knife so that whatever it cuts is tainted with the jected sense. Relatively speaking the sense moves quite slowly, with 
flavour of rotted fish sauce. Using this spell offensively is somewhat 

a maximum speed of ten times the spell’s Intensity in kilometres per 
difficult, but it might be utilised to cause a faux pas; forcing some- 

hour. When focus lapses, the receptor remains static but it keeps on 
one to spit something out unexpectedly; or perhaps make somebody 

relaying ambient information. If for any reason the projected sense 
abandon a complete meal, allowing the caster to claim it for himself. 

is detected, it can be dispelled or even attacked with a magically 

ToucHh 
Creates an illusion of tactility, which when combined with other DEeAaTthH fFrRoOmM AFfAaRr 

types of phantasm can grant them a greater degree of reality. The Although Project (Sense) s oflen used to search or spy from remote 
sense imposed can range from feathery tickles to resilient impact, et secure locations, its main advantage is that it enables a sorcerer to cast 
although in truth there is nothing actually there. So a target could spells at extreme Range, ostensibly safe from reprisal. Whlst this may 
be goosed from afar or the bite of a phantasmal tiger given crush- seem the perfect way lo curse or assassinate a victim (and indeed s a staple 
ing force. Indeed the spell is so versatile it can be used to replace of the Sword & Sorcery genre), there are certain dfficulties with using it 
the painful lash of a whip with the sense of being gently caressed. in this manner. 
Such sensations simply fool those that interact with target, thus the Fastly there is no guarantee the sorcerer will actually know the precise 
spell cannot inflict, and is itself immune to, damage. Victims may location of hus intended victim. Of course the location of a public figure 
still believe they have been wounded (or not as the case may be), such as a king may be guessed at, but it stull might take some time to_find 
and must resist the spell to avoid psychosomatic effects of receiving has exact position, especially if he lacks a regular schedule. Once a victim 
wounds, even though they have not suffered any actual harm. discovers he s being magically hunted it would be easy to hide or move 

somewhere unforeseen by his hunter, making it mgh tmpossible to locate 
POoRrTtAaLl by serying. 

Concentration Secondly, after extending the Range of a sorcery spell to reach tens or 
Portal creates a magical gateway connecting two places, which hundreds of kilometres, few Shaping points remain to augment its Mag- 

when stepped through, allows instantaneous transportation between nitude; meaning that even modest magical protection will block the attack. 
the caster’s side to the terminus, which may be located anywhere Tus 15 espectally true for places such as temple sanctuares or wizard’s 
within Range. The portal is large enough for objects or creatures lowers which tend to be warded against such magical assaulls. 
with a SIZ up to three times the spell’s Intensity to pass through. - 4 

172



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

augmented weapon or spell —which if successful, transfers the mag- REeVvIiVvIifFyY 
ical effect or damage back to the head of the recipient. Concentration 
A sorcerer can use Project (Sense) to be able to aim a second spell Revivify is used to animate a dead body, creating a mindless 

at a target who is out of direct observation —whether because of dis- undead automaton such as a skeleton or zombie. The spell requires 
tance or blocking obstacles. The piggy-backed spell must also have the relatively whole corpse of a dead creature in order to work, 
sufficient Range to reach the target, and cannot possess a greater although bodies can be assembled piecemeal from dismembered 
Intensity than that of the Project spell. parts of several less intact carcasses, provided time is spent stitching 

flesh or wiring bone together first. 
PRrOoTtEeCcTtIiVvEe WAaRrDd 

The sorcerer can revivify corpses with a maximum SIZ of three 
Protective Ward is an augmenting spell which must be cast in 

times the spell’s Intensity. The characteristics of the skeleton or zom- 
association with one or more other sorcery spells, using the Com- 

bie are as described in the Creatures chapter, but gain a bonus to 
bine component to meld them together. Its purpose is to form an 

STR and CON equal to the Intensity of the spell. All other attri- 
extended wall to which spells such as Damage Resistance, Spell 

butes are based on the original creature. 
Resistance or Spirit Resistance can be bound, so that the magic 

Being mindless, revivified undead rely on their creator to guide 
defends an area or volume, rather than individual targets. 

them. Thus they act with physical skills equivalent to those of the 
The ward can cover an area (or encompass a volume) of up to 

sorcerer (capped by the value of the caster’s Invocation skill), but if 
1 metre per point of Intensity in width, height and depth. Thus an 

he allows his concentration to relax, they lapse into quiescence until 
Intensity 6 Protective Ward could be used to create a simple wall 6 

actively guided again. Nothing prevents the sorcerer from further 
metres wide, a trapezoid pyramid measuring 6m along each verti- 

augmenting the undead servitor with other magic or arming it, pro- 
ces, or even a hemisphere 6m in diameter. As preparation before it 

vided it has the physiology to wear or wield such items. 
is cast, the ward must be inscribed upon a solid surface, its sigils or 
lines either drawn, scratched or etched along the perimeter of the 
area so protected. 

When cast, the sorcerer decides in which direction the ward is 
permeable, if any. Thus a warding could be set up to affect anything 
entering the warded area, or conversely anything leaving it. In cer- 
tain circumstances the caster may wish that the magics woven into 
the perimeter work in both directions. 

REeGgEeNnEeRrAaTtEe 
Concentration 
Regenerate allows the sorcerer to slowly heal injuries by accel- 

erating the natural healing processes of the target. The magic will 
counteract bleeding and stabilise a dying target, but cannot repair 
Major Wounds. Targets regenerate a number of Hit Points per hour 
equal to the Intensity of the spell. These points may be divided 
across several locations or all applied to one location at the will of 
the caster. However, the sorcerer must actively concentrate on the 
spell for healing to occur. If concentration lapses or the spell is ter- 
minated early, the amount of Hit Points recovered is proportional to 
the time spent regenerating. 

REePpUuLlSsEe (CCRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs)) 
Resist (Willpower) 
Repulse is the exact opposite of the Draw spell (see page 168), 

driving off creatures of a specific type within range of the target. It 
has a range of useful applications, such as a personal insect repellent 
or purging homes of vermin. On a larger scale Repulse can keep 
villages clear of especially dangerous creatures, which might pose a 
threat to the inhabitants. As a curse it works well too, from driving 

ScuuLlppPtT (SSuUBbSstTaANnCcEe)) 
prey away from a hunter up to the damning of entire cities by repel- 

Concentration, Resust (Special) 
ling people from entering their forbidding gates! 

Sculpt enables a sorcerer to mould the form of a particular sub- 
The precise nature of the repulsion is left to the caster to decide. 

stance, shaping it to his will. Each variant of the spell affects a specific 
It takes the form of some emotive response, for example disgust, 

type of substance, which can be fairly inclusive, for instance sand, 
nervousness or outright terror. 

stone, water, metal, and so on. The sorcerer can sculpt a volume 
or object with a maximum SIZ of three times the spell’s Intensity. 
Insubstantial substances such as smoke, shadows or mist are instead 
measured in terms of cubic metres equal to the spell’s Intensity. 

173



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

Concentration is only required to actively shape the substance, For example, a sorcerer of SIS 10 who wishes to change into a lion (average 
the spell maintaining the new form until the next change the sor- SIZ 22), requires a Shapechange of Intensity 8; whereas if the same sorcerer 
cerer wishes to make. At the conclusion of the spell the substance wished to turn into a rat (average SIZ 1), he would only need an Intensity of 7. 
will retain its final form, provided the material is rigid. For instance There are many variants of Shapechange, each one specific 
a hole opened in a wall would remain, but a statue moulded out of to a species of creature. The categories are quite broad in scope, 
water would collapse. however, covering an entire family: for example: rodents, canines, 

Although sculpt can create any form imaginable, the actual artis- snakes, etc. To change into a Wyvern, for example, one would need 
tic value or architectural strength of the new shape is limited by the Shapechange (Draconic); assuming the sorcerer had sufficient Inten- 
appropriate Craft or Engineering skill; thus a sorcerer who tried to sity to achieve the new form. The spell only works on living things, 
repair the hull of a ship with this spell would only be as effective as which may resist if they are unwilling. 
his Craft (Carpentry), albeit he’d need no tools, and could perform 
the task in mere moments. ShHRrIinNkK 

If the targeted object is carried or worn by a living creature, then Resist (Special) 

they may resist the spell with Endurance. Whilst the spell can be Shrink is used to miniaturise non-living or inanimate objects, the 

used to discommode/break such objects, their manipulation cannot SIZ of which cannot exceed a maximum of three times the spell’s 

be used to directly inflict harm on the creature (see Shrink, opposite). Intensity. The manner in which objects decrease their proportions is 

Exotic versions of this spell can be used on living substances, different to the Diminish spell, since objects targeted with this magic 

provided the spell can affect the entire plant or creature. Unwilling may be quite small and light. Instead Shrink reduces their dimen- 

targets may attempt to resist. No damage is inflicted on those that sions and weight by a factor equal to the Intensity. For example a 

fail, but their physique and appearance may be warped as the sor- broad sword has a default SIZ of 1, but if subject to an Intensity 8 

cerer desires. Shrink spell it would be reduced to an eighth of its length and mass, 
making it much easier to conceal. 

SensEe (OOBbJjEeCcTt,, STtaATtEe oORr SUuBbSsTtAaNnCcEe)) If the targeted object is carried or worn by a living creature, 
Concentration then they may resist the spell with Endurance. Otherwise the object 
Sense is utilised as a means to detect valuables, lost possessions or gets no save against the magic. When used offensively upon worn 

hidden objects from afar. Each incidence of this spell senses a spe- objects, the targeted item either tears open, squeezes off, or if it is 
cific type of object, physiological status or unique substance. Such too resilient to break, simply stops shrinking when it meets too much 
categories are usually quite broad, to ensure some degree of versa- resistance. So using Shrink on a soldier’s full helmet might miniatur- 
tility. Examples include precious metals, fresh water, weapons, flesh ise it to the point where it is painfully tight and impossible to remove, 
and bone, edible food, or even undeath. but it will not inflict any significant harm on its wearer. 

The caster must concentrate to detect his spell’s objective, which 
reveals its presence by tweaking one of the sorcerer’s primary senses. SmMOoTtHhEeRr 
Thus the location of water might be indicated by a gurgling, tinkling Resust (Endurance) 

noise which strengthens as the caster draws closer to its source. Smother slowly asphyxiates a target, starving it of air so that it 

Sufficient thickness of interposing material will block the spell, collapses choking and gasping. The magic affects targets with a SIZ 

which can penetrate a number of metres of solid wood, earth or up to three times the Intensity of the spell. Those that fail to resist 

water equal to the spell’s Intensity. Denser materials such as metal or begin to suffocate immediately, suffering damage at the start of the 

stone reduce this to a number of centimetres equal to the Intensity. next Round (see Asphyxiation page 71). The spell can also be used 

Penetrating magical protections require that the Intensity of Sense on flames to extinguish candles, lamps, and even fires of up to 1 

exceeds that of the protective spell. cubic metre per Intensity. 

Sense cannot discern more insubstantial things like emotions or Normally this spell ceases to inflict damage once the victim passes 

intents. out. Rarer versions possess more dire effects, actually filling the vic- 
tim’s lungs with water, blood, or even sand so that they actually die. 

ShHAaPpeEcChHaAnNGgEe (tToO CRrEeAaTtUuRrEe)) 
Resust (Endurance) SPpEeLlLl REeSsIisStTaAnNcCEe 
Shapechange morphs the physical body of the target into that of Spell Resistance provides the recipient protection against magic 

another species. The sorcerer can affect any living creature of a SIZ cast at them. It blocks incoming spells with a Magnitude equal to, 

up to three times the Intensity of the spell. The SIZ of the original or less than, its own. If a spell or miracle manages to overcome this 

form, added to the difference in SIZ between the original and mod- protection, the Spell Resistance suffers no harm, unless of course it 

ified form, must be within this range. itself was the target of magical dismissal. 

The magic transforms the target into an average example of the The negative side of Spell Resistance is that it cannot discern 

new species. He adopts the physical Characteristics (STR, CON, between friendly or hostile magic. Thus someone seriously wounded 

SIZ and DEX) of the creature assumed, plus whatever inherent under its protection may need to terminate the spell or be prevented 

attacks and modes of locomotion it possesses. The recipient may from receiving magical healing. Spell Resistance affects targets with 

use the creature’s base skills or his own, if they are better. Magical or a SIZ up to three times the Intensity of the spell. 

supernatural abilities are not granted, and nor are any of the mental 
SPpIirRIitT REeSsIisStTaAnNcCEe 

characteristics. 
Spirit Resistance blocks spirits and intangible entities of other 

planes from coming into contact with the recipient. The magic 

174



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

blocks spirits of an Intensity up to half the Intensity of the spell. Both the sorcerer and the target retain their own skills and men- 
Tor example, an Intensity 3 disease spirit would be blocked by an tal Characteristics, but gain the STR, CON; SIZ and DEX of the 
Intensity 5 or 6 Spirit Resistance. other’s body, which may require recalculation of some attributes. 
A blocked spirit is unable to touch, discorporate, possess or oth- Since this spell can be used upon creatures as well as sapient 

erwise engage the recipient in Spirit Combat. Likewise any magic beings, the sorcerer takes provisions to ensure his own body cannot 
cast by a spirit at the recipient is also blocked unless the Magnitude suffer harm from the temporary occupant; for instance by leaving it 
of the spell exceeds the Intensity of the Spirit Resistance. under the supervision of servants or magically binding himself into 

immobility. 
StToORrEe MAaNnNnAa If the sorcerer’s body is killed whilst switched with a victim, his 

Store Manna creates a temporary storage vessel for Magic Points, consciousness will also die when the spell ends. Using this spell a 
a reservoir which can charged, then later be called on to power the sorcerer could briefly escape the death of their own body in order 
sorcerer’s own spells. It requires an object to be the target of the to wreak revenge. Casting Switch Body as an Enchantment (see 
spell in which the Magic Points are physically stored. This can be Enchant, page 168) can technically allow a sorcerer permanently to 
anything from an eggshell to an iron idol, but more delicate objects inhabit the body of a target and assume its status or influence, if he 
can be prone to breakage. The object can store a maximum number can carry off the exchange. 
of Magic Points equal to the Intensity of the spell. Travelling further 
from this object than the Range of the spell cuts the sorcerer off TaPp (CCHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCc)) 
from his Magic Points. Resist (Special) 

When initially cast, Store Manna has no Magic Points of its Tap is used to drain Characteristic points from victims in order to 
own. These must be transferred from other sources; such as vol- boost sorcerer’s own, potentially achieving superhuman levels. Each 
untary donations from other sorcerers. Depending on the setting, version of the Tap spell affects a different characteristic. Targets 
Magic Points might also be gathered from ritual sacrifices, tapping may willingly submit to the spell or attempt to resist its effects, using 
of magical locations, and other more unusual methods (see Where Endurance if the spell is affecting a physical characteristic (STR, 
Do Magic Points Come From? Page 115). CON, SIZ or DEX) or Willpower if affecting a mental one (INT, 

If the spell expires, naturally coming to the end of its duration or POW or CHA). 
from being dispelled (or the object is broken), any remaining Magic The number of points drained from each target is equal to the 
Points stored within the object are lost. spell’s Intensity (down to a minimum of 1 point). The sorcerer how- 

The sorcerer can only benefit from a single casting of Store ever only gains one fifth of these points — up to a maximum of dou- 
Manna at a time, additional castings either not working or replac- ble his original characteristic value. For instance if a sorcerer cast 
ing the previous incidence of the spell. In addition, the application Tap (STR) at Intensity 7 on four targets, each of the victims would 
of the Targets component does not permit multiplication of the lose seven points of STR whilst the sorcerer’s own strength would be 
Magic Point storage, but simply allows the default number to be split augmented by +6 points. 
between multiple objects. Once the spell concludes, the characteristic points of all involved 

revert to normal. Certain versions of this spell such as Tap (IN'T) or 
SuUmMmMOoNn Tap (DEX) can be very potent, especially if combined with Enchant. 

Resust (Evade) When using Tap to steal a creature’s SIZ, the magic causes the vic- 
Summon brings a non-living, inanimate object to the sorcerer, tim to become wasted and skeletal, rather than shrinking them. 

teleporting it from wherever it previously rested to his hand or body 
as desired. The magic can summon an object of a SIZ up to three TEeLleEpPaAtThHyY 
times the spell’s Intensity. Usually this is something he can directly Resist (Willpower) 
perceive with his own senses, although objects residing at greater Telepathy allows a sorcerer to establish mental two way commu- 
distances can be summoned via magical observation, or previously nication with a target, without the need for shared language or even 
prepared with the Mark spell. species. The caster can form the telepathic link with beings of an 

If the object is something in the possession of a living creature, INT up to twice the Intensity of the spell. Non-sapient creatures use 
it may attempt to resist the magical theft by snatching it back or their INT equivalent and not their INS. In this case, communication 
diving away. This spell is often used to call forth prepared equip- is limited to the exchange of mental pictures or emotions. 
ment the sorcerer does not wish to carry, or to arm himself in a The spell also grants the ability to experience memory, if the tar- 
moment’s notice. Clothing and armour must be prior mounted on get is willing to share it. If cast on multiple targets, the sorcerer can 
a mannequin for it to be instantly settled about the sorcerer’s body. decide if everyone connected via the Telepathy can communicate 
When the spell ends the object returns to the precise location it was freely, or whether he acts as a hub for numerous private links. 
summoned from. 

TEeLleEpPoORrTt 
SwiitchH Bopdy Concentration, Resist (Evade) 

Resist (Willpower) Teleport enables a sorcerer to instantaneously move the recipi- 
Switch Body enables a sorcerer to switch his consciousness with ent anywhere within the Range of the spell. Several limiting factors 

that of another, so that they exchange bodies. The caster can affect apply to this transportation, these being that the destination is in 
targets with a POW up to twice the Intensity of the spell. Unwilling direct observation (or tagged by the Mark spell), there is solid footing 
targets who fail to resist become host to the caster’s mind, and their and no object bars their arrival; otherwise the spell automatically 
own psyche finds itself in the sorcerer’s body. fails. A sorcerer is limited to teleporting creatures with a SIZ up to 

175



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

three times the Intensity The effect of the spell 
of the spell. depends on the substance 

Although the spell per- it was converted to. A solid 
mits contiguous jumping material such as gold will 
until its Duration expires, place a living victim into 
the recipient is forced to a state of suspended ani- 
teleport back to its origin mation which lasts until 
before selecting a new the sorcery terminates. 
destination to travel to. Unless defaced, the tempo- 
Fach jump is treated as rary golden statue reverts 
a Reactive Action requir- back to its original form 
ing the expenditure of unharmed. If the substance 
an Action Point, and can was ice or salt on the other 
be used to avoid attacks hand, some wearing might 
in an opposed roll in a occur due to abrasive winds 
similar fashion to Evade. or melting. 
When the spell ends or Being transformed into 
is dismissed, the recipi- a fluid substance usually 
ent returns to his starting spells doom for the original 
point. This occurs even if target. Objects converted 
he is dead. to sand or water collapse 

Teleport can be fur- under their own weight 
ther limited by requiring and may disperse entirely. 
the presence of a certain Those transmogrified into 
material or substance at more viscous substances 
cither end of the jump, often deform, and living 
through which to pass. creatures which emerge 
Tor example a sorcerer alive from such an expe- 
may only be able to rience are often horribly 
pass from one shadow warped or mutated by the 
to another. Likewise this experience. 
could be pools of water, Whilst it can be used as 
burning fires or even liv- a horrible curse, transmog- 

Kratos's Wrack (Darkness) spell easily overwhelms a Meerish champion. His pain is caused by 
ing trees! ethereal serpents that bite and tea; their venom inflictingfreezing agony. rify is normally used in more 

productive (or at least inven- 
TRrAaNnSsFfEerR WOoUuNnDd tive) ways, anything from trick- 

Concentration, Resust (Endurance) ing merchants to undermining fortifications. Games Masters should 
Transfer Wound allows a sorcerer to transfer physical damage restrict this spell to only the most foul sorcerers if it is likely to be 

from himself to the target or vice versa. By spending an Action Point abused for the purpose of killing. 
and concentrating on his Turn he may move a single wound of dam- 
age equal or less than the spell’s Intensity between the target and TrRaApP SouLl 
himself. Resist (Willpower) 

Wounds must be shifted between identical or at least roughly Trap Soul snares the spirit of a corporeal creature so that at the 
similar locations, which cause the spell to fail if cast on a target moment of its death, it can be trapped within a specially prepared 
with alien physiology. When the spell ends, transferred wounds object or location. The magic can affect targets with a POW up to 
remain where they were last shifted. If multiple targets are incorpo- twice the Intensity of the spell. Unwilling targets may attempt to 
rated, then damage transferred from the sorcerer is divided equally resist nefarious use of this spell. 
between each recipient. Only those beings that die before the Trap Soul spell ends, and 

whilst still within its Range have their souls imprisoned, unable to 
TRrAaNnSsMmOoGgRrIiFfYy (tToO SuUBbSsTtaANnCcEe)) depart for the spirit world or afterlife until the object containing 

Resist (Endurance) them is destroyed, or the spell concludes. 
Transmogrify converts the base substance of a creature or object Whilst held within their prison, the soul is unable to communi- 

to some other material. Each variant of the spell converts targets cate, unless contacted by magic with a Intensity greater than the 
to a specific type of substance, which can be as broad or narrow as Trap Soul’s Magnitude. Sorcerers specialising in necromancy often 
is suitable for the setting, for example salt, mud or even gold! The combine this spell with Enchant to create immortal oracles, to eter- 
sorcerer can transmogrify a target with a maximum SIZ of three nally imprison deadly enemies, or to bind the soul of a slain victim 
times the spell’s Intensity. Living creatures and magical constructs to its own place of death or body, where it endures as a Haunt (see 
are permitted to resist. page 150). 

176



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

UNnDdEeAaTthH 
Resist (Endurance) 
Undeath enables the sorcerer to turn the recipient into an undead 

monster, gaining the ability to forgo air, food, water, warmth or rest; 
to experience immunity to disease and poison; and no longer to suf- 
fer the adverse effects of Serious Wounds, fatigue or ageing. In effect 
they gain the Undead creature trait. All this comes at a cost however; 
whilst under the effect of the magic, the recipient is infertile, no 
longer heals, and is incapable of generating Magic Points naturally. 

The sorcerer can affect living targets with a CON up to three 
times the Intensity of the spell. Unwilling targets may attempt to 
resist. Sorcerers who fear death often resort to this spell, and com- 
bine it with Enchant to make it permanent, turning themselves into 
an immortal lich or mummy. Occasionally it is used to impart a 
terrible curse on those that transgress cult taboos or some equally 
heinous crime. 

WRrAaCcKk (SSuUbBsStTaAnNCcEe oORr HAaRrMm)) 
Concentration, Resust (Evade) 
Wrack enables a sorcerer to harm opponents with deadly bolts 

or waves of sorcerous energy. On his Turn as a Combat Action, he 
may launch a magical attack against the target or targets, using his 
Invocation skill as the attack roll, which may be resisted with Evade. 
Successful attacks strike a random location, the Intensity of the spell 
denoting the damage it inflicts. Worn armour does not protect, but 
natural or magical Armour Points reduce damage as normal. 

WRrAaCcKk DAaMmAaGgEe 

Intensity Damage 

1-2 1d2 

3-4 1d4 

5-6 1d6 

7-8 1d8 

9-10 1d10 

11-12 2d6 

The caster must concentrate to launch a Wrack attack, but can 
let the spell drop into dormancy to perform other actions in-between 
cach magical assault. 

Each variant of this spell inflicts damage in a different manner, 
according to the school from which it was learned. For example 
Wrack (Darkness) taught by the Stygian Path would strike the tar- 
get with serpent-like tendrils of freezing shadow, whereas Wrack 
(Death) learned from the Guardians of the Grave, may cause a vic- 
tim’s limbs to rot with necrotic lesions. 

177



