Mythras:  Magic

% Mo e!  m KW S s A 7 = 17 %X N 

Magic

| TR Mok oo F m KW K I K EA P XN 

agic comes in many forms and derives from numerous 
sources, but all forms of magic have one thing in com- MAaGgIiCcAaLl DIiSsCcIiPpLlIinNEeSs 

M mon: the ability for the user to overcome or manipu- MyTtHRAS provides rules for five distinct magical types, which 
late the natural order of the world to achieve specific, supernatural for case of reference are called disciplines. Others exist, and will 
effects. The theist’s magic derives from the relationship with his god; no doubt be explored in future supplements. Each of the following 
the sorcerer’s magic derives from the rituals and formulae he has magical disciplines receives its own chapter describing in detail how 
mastered; the animist’s magic comes from his relationship with the that magic works, how characters come by it, and what spells, spirits 
spirits; and the mystic’s magic comes from within himself. Despite or other abilities are available. 
their sources and the relationships that drive them, all these magi- Although each discipline provides a unique and interesting style 
cians are able to perform remarkable feats that are beyond the capa- of magic, a MYTHRAS campaign does not have to include all five. 
bilities of non-practitioners. Games Masters should consider whether each discipline is suitable 

for his game setting. A campaign based on an archipelago of tropical 
islands might only include Animism; whereas a more inclusive game 
world might be based upon opposing cultures, one dominated by 

TAaIilLoOrRIinNgG MAaGgIiCc sorcerers, and the other theist priests, but both of which also practice 
Magic is one of the most variable aspects of any roleplaying mysticism in addition. 

game. Whilst elements such as how character generation or combat Note that every discipline of magic has its own strengths and 
works are ubiquitous no matter what the setting, almost every histor- weaknesses and are not necessarily balanced with one another. The 
ical and fantasy genre has its own idiosyncratic style of magic — how five core disciplines are: 
it is prepared, cast, and the scale of effect it can produce. 

To ensure flexible adaptability, magic in MYTHRAS has been given 
a range of options so that it can support a wide array of settings FoLlk MAaGgIiCc 
and styles. The following sections describe different alternatives with Tolk Magic is the most basic form of magic available, and is 

which magic can be tweaked. These suggestions are intended to usually associated with hedge wizards, witches, wise women, and so 

inspire Games Masters to create unique magical ecologies, helping forth. These are simple spells and cantrips that offer limited magical 

to overcome issues where a default system may appear at odds with effects and can, where permissible, be used by anyone. Folk Magic is 

the setting concept the Games Master wishes to model. frequently taught by communities from an early age with the types 

Although at first glance the range of options may seem some- of spells reflecting community necessities. This means that the Folk 

what overwhelming, there are in fact only a few core considerations Magic taught by a Barbarian culture will differ to that taught by 

required: a Civilised one. Folk Magic is also taught by some professions or 
cults to aid their members in their jobs and duties. Folk Magic can 

& What magical disciplines are available? therefore be accessible and available to all — in theory. In practice, 
& What magical traditions control magic? Tolk Magic might be heavily restricted depending on the campaign 
& How many magical abilities do traditions provide? setting, 
& How long does magic take to cast? 
& How is magical energy generated and recovered? 

ANnIiMmIisSmM 
& Can characters start with magic? 

A higher magical discipline, Animism is the practice of dealing 
with the spirit world and spirits that are bound to the mortal realm 

112

L 
X 

i 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

in some form. Animists are shamans and totemists who deliberately 
develop relationships with spirits to work magical effects, usually on 
behalf of a community but also for obtaining personal power. Ani- 
mists believe that all things, be they animate or inanimate, organic 
or non-organic, are possessed of a spirit or soul. A relationship with 
that spirit allows its power to be drawn upon and used by the ani- 
mist. Animism usually teaches a profound respect for the natural 
and spirit worlds, inculcating in its practitioners a need for restraint 
and reciprocation. This does not mean, though, that there are no 
rogue shamans; even animism has its share of selfish individuals pre- 
pared to ignore this respect in favour of gaining greater personal 
power at the expense of the spirit world. 

MYysTtIicCiIsSmM 
Mysticism achieves its effects through a combination of deep 

inner understanding of the fabric of reality, and channelling energy 
to produce a resulting action. The mystic attains this state of under- 
standing through constant contemplation of the world around him, 
discerning its truths and meditating on the very nature of existence. 
This process is quite often linked with the asking of philosophically 
challenging questions, but it is more common for the mystic simply 
to understand both his place in the universe, and how the universe 
itself is placed. This comprehension forms a path to unlock the mys- 
tic’s inner potential. Mystics, ultimately, seek to transcend the fetters 
of the natural world, and achieve a higher state of consciousness 
that places them directly at one with the forces of the cosmos. The 
reality though is far more complex, because every accomplished 
mystic knows that an even higher state of existence can be attained, 
one that transcends even the powers of the gods. 

SoORrCcEeRrYy 
Sorcery is the manipulation of underlying laws that directly upon is always based on the nature of the god or pantheon being 

control the very fabric of creation. These formulae are complex worshipped. The strength of devotion to a god has a direct impact 
equations: a mixture of mathematical, psychological, existential, on the power of the magic worked; assuming that the deity retains 
and supernatural principals that allow the sorcerer to grasp a por- some awareness of his worshippers, maintaining a cordial relation- 
tion of reality and bend it to his will. Sorcerers do not need to rely ship with the god is necessary to receive its power. 
on gods for their powers; nor do they need to engage with spirits 
to achieve their effects. Their manipulation of these metaphysical 
equations makes sorcery very powerful and very flexible. However, 
it also means sorcerers are viewed with suspicion, and even fear and MAaGgIiCcAaLl TRrAaDdIiTtIioOnNSs 
hatred by those who come by their magic through less direct means. Although people may be born with the capacity to work magic 

And, because sorcerers have little need for gods or spirits, it is not to greater or lesser degrees, the actual skill of using it is normally 
uncommon for them to develop a certain degree of arrogance and taught and cultivated via some kind of social organisation; such as a 
disdain for those who choose to venerate such entities. Although cult, order or a mentor. These are known collectively as traditions. 
some sorcerers maintain a healthy respect for the gods, and may For example, the Cult of Myceras and the Cult of the Seven Badoshi 
even practice worship themselves, this does not lessen the fact that Devils are both traditions based upon religious organisations, but 
the sorcerer is, through his magic, attempting to perform acts that worship different gods and teach their priesthoods different miracles. 
others may consider as the province of greater beings. Some traditions are not limited to providing a single discipline 

of magic, but can combine two or more. A sorcery order could offer 

THhEeIisSmM both Folk Magic and Sorcery to its members; the former providing 
petty cantrips to lower ranking apprentices, whilst adepts and above 

Theists draw their magic from their gods. Through worship and 
are taught more potent spells of the higher art. 

devotion, those that dedicate themselves to a deity channel these 
It should also be noted that membership of a tradition need not 

powers in the form of miracles, and thus gain the ability to work 
necessarily grant access to magic. One could be a faithful worship- 

similar effects in the mundane world — albeit in a much diluted form. 
per of Myceras, and hold the rank of lay member in his cult, yet still 

A worshipper of the Storm God might be able to summon lightning; 
have no ability to cast theistic magic. 

a worshipper of the sun god might be able to create brilliant daylight 
even in the midst of the blackest night. The magic theists can call 

113



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

As part of setting up the magical traditions in a campaign Games member of the warrior caste may be restricted to only learning 
Masters should give some thought to what type of organisation or mysticism. 
social groups will provide it. Some examples follow. 

SPpEeCcIiEeSs SPpEeCcIiFfIicC 
Cuutlrts Some races or species are naturally predisposed to magical 

Organised sects who venerate a religion, a philosophy or an indi- knowledge. Elves or satyrs, for instance, are associated with consid- 
vidual, cults receive a great deal more attention in their own chap- erable magical powers. Within the species magical skills are natural 
ter. By and large cults only teach magic to their members, and are capabilities that only need training and refinement. Depending on 
likely to restrict certain types or magic and spells to those who attain what type of magic they were inherently gifted with, the relevant 
higher ranks within the cult. Cults can teach any kind of magic, magical skills could be considered Standard for that species. Typi- 
depending on their nature. Some may mix magical styles (theism cally species specific magic tends to be of one type: Folk, Animism 
and animism, say) whilst others may have only one, and so on. or Theism the most common. Magic such as sorcery and mysticism 

may be learned but is generally not a natural accoutrement. 

GuuIiLlDdSs 
Guilds are professional bodies that represent and guard mem- ToTtEemMSs 

bers of that occupation. Because they are focused on protecting Many cultures adopt totems or other symbols that become a 
their market, and because they are concerned with more mundane focus and provider of magical power. The most prevalent exam- 
skills, guilds are unlikely to offer higher magic, focusing instead on ples are those practicing animism, but there is no reason why totems 
Tolk Magic — and only those spells of direct use and relevance to the should be confined solely to spirit magic. Sorcery orders may gain 
profession. their knowledge through totemic practices; and idolatry in theistic 

worship is very similar. Rather than an organised cult of teachers, it 

RoYyAaLlTtYy AanNDd NOoBbLlEe HOoUuSsEeSs is the totem itself which is the channel for magical knowledge and 
skill, granting magical lore to those that establish suitable bonds with 

Kings, queens and emperors might attain royal power through 
it or are born into the correct family, tribe or race to understand its 

their command of magic, or through the support of those who wield 
lore. 

it. In some settings a monarch might be truly a divine appointment, 
the living representative of a deity in the world. Conversely the 
power to work magic might be dependent on inheriting the cor- 
rect noble bloodline. Magic can be of any type, although in most How MAaNnYy ABbILilIiTtIiEeSs? 
works of fantasy, magic-wielding monarchs tend to be either theists Abilities are the spells, talents, miracles or spirits provided by 
or sorcerers. Outside the royal sphere magic use may be outlawed: it magical traditions. The number of abilities a tradition offers is com- 
could be a threat to the monarchy, and thus needs to be suppressed. pletely setting-specific. A world in which cult theocracies rule entire 
More benevolent monarchs might use magic for the greater good, nations may offer more miracles to its priesthood than a setting 
but where magic keeps the monarchy in power, it is usual for all where grimoires of sorcery are exceptionally rare, each containing 
sources of power to be jealously guarded. but a single spell. Several elements can adjust the amount and pro- 

clivity of abilities available to a tradition. 

InNdDIivViIdDuUaALl TEeaACcHhEeRrSs Firstly, traditions normally structure the learning path of the 

The wandering hedge magician, hermit-mage, old and wise magical abilities they provide. Members only gain access to more 

counsellor... fantasy is awash with examples of learned individuals potent magics at higher levels of achievement and rank. For exam- 

who find and mentor an apprentice in the magical arts. Such prac- ple; if a sorcery order knows the particularly deadly spell Wrack, it 

titioners are usually specialists in one form of magic, and may even is highly unlikely that it will be taught to students until they have 

be an established part of a community, training the young adults attained a certain degree of knowledge, maturity and seniority to be 

in those magical powers they will need to continue contributing to entrusted with its power and secrets. 

society, or making their way in the world. Primitive and nomadic Secondly, traditions may teach more than one type of magic. A 

cultures often rely on this form of patronage, lacking the popula- cult might combine Folk Magic with Theism for instance, granting a 

tion numbers and organisation to support more formalised magical broader range of abilities. In this case the Games Master can grant a 

tutoring. similar number of abilities per discipline, or limit the number given 
to the more powerful one. 

SocciiaALl CAaSsTtEeSs 
Similar to magic restricted to nobility, social castes can denote 

SPpEeLlLlSs bByY ORrGgAaNnIiSsAaTtIioOnN 
what type of magic is available or taught to a person depending on 

Medium 
the birth caste they belong to. Settings with magic limited by social 

Low Magic Magic Magic Rich 
caste should probably offer a range of different types according to 

Number of spells, 
birth rank, hereditary lineage or something similar. Someone of the 

spirits, miracles, 
priestly caste might automatically join the predominant religion and 

talents etc an 1d3 1d3+3 1d3+6 
be indoctrinated into Theism for example; whereas a lower born 

organisation 

possesses: 

114



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

A Games Master should consider how versatile he wishes magic THhEe GAaMmEeSs MAaSTstEeRr'’Ss SaAgGaA 
to be in his setting and adjust the number and availability of abilities Steve designs his campaign to make use of all the avarlable magical disci- 
to suit. But, as a rule of thumb, use the Spells by Organisation table Dlines, assigning them on the basis of culture and species: 
as a guide: 

In selecting what magical abilities are available, balance is key. &K Folk Magic is known to all cultures and sapient species 

Just because a spell, miracle, talent or spirit is listed in MYTHRAS &K Animism is practiced by the wild tribes of bestial centaurs, satyrs and 

does not mean that everyone should have access to it. Create spell minotaurs 

lists; choose wisely. Don’t feel compelled to use every ability found &K Mysticism is studied by the remote nomad clans of the high plateau desert 

in these rules. Indeed, some of the magics found in MYTHRAS can &K Sorcery is ostensibly forbidden in all cultures and is rare beyond isolated 

be exceptionally powerful. If Games Masters feel these would desta- individuals 

bilise his game then they should be either be omitted completely, K Theism is_favoured by both the civilised city states (of which Meeros is 

withheld or reserved for potent non-player characters. central), and the barbarian hordes of the Badoshi Warlords. 

Thus it is probably unwise to allow players to devise their own 
traditions and spell lists — at least not without Games Master guid- 
ance and approval. MAaGgIiCcAaLl ENnEeRrGgYy 

Although knowledge of magical powers may be prevalent in 
a setting, it does not automatically follow that the magical energy 

RIiTtUuAaLlIiSsTtIicC required to invoke them is as widespread, or even available. Having 
 

the skill to transform a man into a leopard is useless if you don’t have 

CAaSsTtIinNgG TIimMEeSs the energy to cast the spell or request the miracle from the gods. 
Whilst every character has an attribute known as Magic Points, 

By default each type of magic in MYTHRAS has a casting time of 
derived from their characteristic POW, this merely represents the 

mere seconds. Whilst this permits magicians to utilise their powers 
capacity to hold or store magical energy, not necessarily the ability 

more freely, especially in combat situations, it can pose some prob- 
to generate their own. 

lems when trying to replicate the feeling of extreme effort it often 
Of all the considerations required to tailor MYTHRAS magic to 

takes for magic to be cast in some genres. 
a campaign setting, where magical energy comes from (and how to 

There are several methods of handling this issue: 
recover it) is perhaps the most important. 

& Grant casters the ability to roll an Easy skill check if spending 
one minute in preparation, or Very Easy if spending an hour, WHhEeRrEe Do MAaGgIiCc 
but only for the purposes of casting the spell (and any subse- 
quent resistance checks) Poiints COoMmEe FrRoOmM?? 

& Increase the default base casting time from Turns to Rounds, Magical energy should come from a particular source as defined 
Minutes, Hours or even Days instead by the campaign setting. The following options need not be generic; 

& As above, but in duress allow a magician to speed up cast- for example some types of magic might require particular sources 
ing at a skill penalty of one difficulty grade per time frame different from each other. Also the setting might permit a few 
advanced sources to be used in combination, so that there are several methods 

of gathering Magic Points. 
Of course ritualistic casting times need not be universally applied 

to all magical disciplines, which can grant one type of magic a sig- & Self: the simplest and most convenient source of Magic 
nificant speed advantage over others. For example Sorcery and Points, characters generate their own magical energy 
Animism could have their base casting time increased to minutes, & Sacrifice: magical energy is ‘harvested’ from the sacrifice of 
whilst Mysticism remains unmodified. This will have a significant on living creatures 
a campaign setting, but can create some rather unusual, yet enter- & Magical Locations: magic is naturally produced at foci such 
taining, twists in how magic is utilised. as ley-lines, temples, and the like 

In general, increasing the length of casting times will turn magic & Destruction of an inanimate object: magic may come from 
into a more thoughtfully applied tool — rather than a method of a ethereal or mineral substance of limited supply, gems for 
applying greater firepower — and encourages careful planning. It can example 
generate a huge amount of atmosphere, especially if the magician & Consumption of a substance: the consumption of particu- 
must augment this preparation time with the inscription of magical lar herbs, narcotics or animal products may provide magical 
sigils, tossing of powders, use of ritualised objects or even singing energy 
and dancing. & Veneration: in a similar manner to the worship of gods, 

Games Masters should take care when applying ritualistic cast- magic points might be provided to individuals who tap into, 
ing times. Although it can add ambience to a setting, players with or become the focus of, organised worship 
magic-using characters may feel hampered by increased preparation 
times, and some magical abilities may lose a degree of applicability Characters must have access to the source of their magical 

if they cannot be cast near instantaneously. energy to be able to regain expended Magic Points. If they do not, 
then points used in the process of casting spells or using magical 
abilities cannot be regained until the source is obtained. 

115



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

SEeLlFf travel about with a string of such animals in tow, which will require 

Here, the character attracts and stores magical energy from the care, feeding, guarding, and so on. 

world around him. Recovering Magic Points is simply a matter of Note that those magicians seeking sapient victims for sacrifice 

resting, and letting his body absorb the natural magical emanations had better belong to a culture which supports such activities. Need- 

of the world until his points are restored. He need do nothing else. less killing of prisoners or slaves for the purposes of invoking magic 

This has been considered the default source of Magic Points in other has dark connotations, especially when that magic is used for per- 

games, but Games Masters should not feel limited by it. sonal gain rather than being intended for the care and protection of 
the community. 

SAaCcRrIiFfIicCeE 
Sacrifice is a common trope of both the Sword & Sorcery genre MAaGgIiCcAaLl LoOCcAaTtIioONnSs 

and historical religious practices. It requires the ritualised death of Here, a geographical place or physical structure acts as a con- 

a ‘victim’ to produce a number of Magic Points, which can then be duit for natural magical energy which individuals can then absorb, 

sent to an otherworld entity such as a god, spirit or demon in order replenishing diminished resources. The individual must spend a 

to propitiate them; or the magical energy can be absorbed by the given period of time at this location, resting, praying, meditating, 

person performing the sacrifice. and so on, for Magic Points to accrue. How much magic depends on 

The amount of magical energy produced by such an act is an the strength of the place, and its environment. Some locations may 

important consideration. Traditionally the most minimal sacrifices only provide Magic Points to particular types of magical disciplines 

are livestock animals, whilst the most potent are sapient beings. With — ¢.g. druid groves might only produce Magic Points for Animists. 

that in mind, MYTHRAS assumes as a default that the amount of Give a location a Magical Strength of either 25%, 50%, 75% or 

Magic Points harvested by a being’s death is equal to their POW. 100%, depending on its size and importance. The Magical Strength 

This can be raised or lowered as deemed fitting for the setting. is the percentage of a character’s Magic Points that can be regained. 

Although at face value this may appear to provide a boundless Tor example, a character with a normal stock of 16 Magic Points 

source of Magic Points, there are several important limitations to spending time at a shrine with Magical Strength of 25% would only 

keep in mind. Firstly very few cultures or societies have ‘excess’ be able to recover back to a level of four Magic Points; whereas 

livestock available for the purposes of ritual offerings.This is why attending a major temple with Magical Strength 100% would allow 

it is called a sacrifice; because it may cost the community dearly him to restore his full 16 Magic Points. 

to provide an animal from their subsistence level herds or flocks. The amount of time taken to replenish Magic Points should 

In places where animals are freely available for purchase, then the depend on the overall strength of magic in the campaign. See 

requirement becomes a question of finances, as a horse or cow is not Recovering Magic Points below for guidance. 

a cheap commodity. 
DEeSsTtRrUuCcTtIioOnN aAnNdD COoNnSsUuMmPpTtIioONn 

Secondly each cult is likely to have a specific type of creature it 
These work in similar ways to Magical Locations. The thing 

requires as the preferred sacrificial victim, meaning that killing the 
destroyed or consumed should be given a Magical Strength of 25%, 

wrong beast may net the character no Magic Points at all. Even if 
50%, 75% or 100%, depending on its quality, purity and other cru- 

the correct species of creature is located, it may be required to be 
cial factors. When destroyed or imbibed, Magic Points are recharged 

in perfect health, possess an unblemished skin, be of a particular 
back up to the level indicated by the percentage, at the rates sug- 

colour, and so on. Once these factors are taken into consideration, 
gested in the Recovering Magic Points section.. 

it is doubtful that adventuring priests, sorcerers or shamans would 

HE AMES ASTER'S AGA VEeNnEeRrAaTtIioOnN 
The Games Master’s Saga

Characters who orchestrate the ceremonial worship of super- 
Further detailing bs campaign world, Steve develops the traditions which 

natural beings are able to tap into magical energy produced by the 
will teach and control magic. He constrains the practice of each discipline 

worshippers. Others, who attain the status of heroes and demigods, 
thusly: 

may even use the veneration of themselves as a source of Magic 
Folk Magic s taught as both an adjunct to religious cults and via individ- 

Points. The amount of Magical Strength provided by each ritualised 
ual teachers, such as hedge wizards or witches. 

ceremony is dependent on the number of people who offer venera- 
Animism can only be learned by those beast races which still possess an 

tion, as follows: 
amimal affinity to a particular totem spirit. Thus centaurs venerate Great 
Horse, their species totem, with whom only they can_form a bond. Knowledge 

Less than 100: 25% 
us tightly held by clan shamans. 

100-999: 50% 
Mysticism 15 only taught to magically eligible nomads of the correct birth 

1000-9,999: 75% 
caste; thewr path of mysticism dependent on which astrological conjunction is 

10,000 or more: 100% 
at the apex of the sky as the chuld emenrgesfrom uts mother. 

Sorcery, forbudden due to its diabolic overtones, s secretly studied by lone 
practitioners who stumble upon the art, or under the tutelage of recluswe sor- REeCcOoVvEeRrIinNgG MAaGgIiCc POoIiNnTtSs 
cerers living in remote places. How quickly Magic Points return is vital to the feel of a cam- 

Theism s jealously guarded by the innumerable culls which propitiate the paign. Rapid return allows potent powers to be thrown about with 
gods. Each of the cily states has its own unique patron deity, the temple to impunity, whereas slow recovery makes each act of magic an import- 
which acts as the cult centrefor that god. The Badosh: on the other hand have ant decision and rare occurrence. 
a pantheon of seven demons which is universally worshipped by all the tribes. 

116



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

The same principle applies to settings where several different 
How mMAaNnYy MAaGgIiCc POoIiNnTtSs forms of magical power generation exist in parallel. A character 

fFoORr SAaCcRrIiFfIicCiInNgG Aa..... who recuperates at a dolman, performs a sacrifice, and is venerated 
Sacrificial Magic Points are a perfect way to represent the transference by his army of worshippers may only recover as many Magic Points 

or generation of magical power in many hustorical or gritty Sword & as provided by the most productive of those three sources. 

Sorcery settings. Using this method however, will prompt the frequently Of course, games in which magicians recover Magic Points nat- 
urally should ignore this rule, at least where it applies to the number 

asked question of “How much magic is this creature worth?’ 
of Magic Points generated from self. 

As a general rule of thumb, Games Masters should treat tiny animals, 

especially those which can be raised en-mass (such as doves) as capable of 
RUuNnNnIinNGg Out oFf MAaGgIiCc POoIiNnTtSs 

only producing a single Magic Point. Small animals (snakes, cals etc) as 
The consequences of running out of Magic Points are, again, a 

only generate 1d3 Magic Points, medium sized creatures (goats, pugs, and 
campaign decision, and should be dependent on the setting. MyTH- 

50 on) produce 1d6 Magic Points, and large animals (cows, bulls, horses) RAS’s default position is that, when Magic Points reach zero, no more 
2d6 Magic Points. Only truly huge, magical or sapient creatures should spells or magical abilities can be used, but there are no further con- 
provide 3d6 MPs or more. sequences for the character. 

N 4 Additional options are offered below: 

Only some sources of Magic Points permit natural recovery: FaAtTiIgGuUEe ACcCcRrUuAaLl 

Self, Locations and Veneration. These assume complete rest, com- Characters can continue to cast magic or use magical abilities, 

fort, and freedom from threat or stress. Camping in an occupied but gain one level of Fatigue for each Magic Point expended in the 

dungeon or resting in the wilderness during the depths of winter spell or ability attempted. Note that in certain circumstances this 

would prevent recovery; whereas returning to somewhere safe and could kill the caster if a fumble is rolled. 

sheltered like an inn would permit it. 
HIiTt POoIinNTt ATtTtRrIitTiIoOnN 

&1 Magic Point per hour — Good for Magic Rich campaigns As for Fatigue Accrual but, instead, the caster suffers 1 Hit Point 
& 1 Magic Point per day — Good for Medium Magic campaigns of physical damage to all Hit Locations for each spell or ability 
& 1 Magic Point per week — Good for Low Magic campaigns attempted, no matter what its potency, magnitude or intensity. The 
& Magic Points return at particular conjunctions — This option magician can keep on casting spells until he has incurred the equiv- 

is perfect for settings with strong celestial or religious over- alent of a Major Wound, but at this point he is risking imminent 
tones, the Magic Points of a source only being available at death. Natural healing processes are needed to restore expended Hit 
specific times, such as those tapped from Veneration occur- Points; they do not regenerate with Magic Points. 
ring on holy days sacred to that god, or magic from a mega- 
lithic stone circle flowing when the moon is full. UNnCcOoNnSCscIiOoUuSsNnEeSsSs 

On reaching zero Magic Points the character automatically falls 
Whilst Medium or Low Magic recovery rates appear to be crip- comatose and remains that way until at least 1 Magic Point has been 

pling for player character magicians, they do emphasise the rarity regained. Depending on the source of Magic Points, this might 
of magic in some genres. On the other hand they offer a balanced mean extended periods in a coma, or even eventual death if not 
game when characters have access to some of the most potent spells. cared for in the interim. 

In fact the slow Magic Point recovery of a Low Magic campaign 
is perfect for campaigns involving antagonists armed with deadly WIiLlLlpPoOwWEeRr 
magic, allowing characters to survive the wrathful persecution of On reaching zero Magic Points the magician must make a suc- 
say, a sorcerer, if after casting a couple of powerful spells he has to cessful Willpower roll to remain conscious. He is not prevented from 
recover for several months before trying his diabolical magic again. trying to cast a new spell, but each subsequent attempt requires a 

Magic Points from other sources can be recovered by performing new Willpower roll, at an additional difficultly penalty. Thus the 
a ritual sacrifice, formal destruction of certain objects or the relaxed second check is Hard, the third Formidable, and so on. If the magi- 
imbibing of other substances. Those acts in themselves should cian fails they collapse into unconsciousness for a random number 
require at least an hour of effort, unless the magician wishes to has- of days up to the number of Willpower checks taken (so failing the 
ten the experience and risk the loss of the magical energy generated. third check would be 1d3 days of unconsciousness). 

HE ULE OF ECOVERY Endurance or Die
The Rule of Recovery NDURANCE OR iE 

Reaching zero Magic Points represents the exhaustion of life- 
As a general guideline, it is suggested that characters cannot 

force. The magician must make a successful Endurance roll or die, 
recover more Magic Points than what is naturally produced by the 

his psychic reserves having being spent completely. If the magician 
local environment or their last ‘recharge’. Thus a character who 

rolls a critical success he regains 1 Magic Point immediately. 
rests in a magical location which can produce 50% of his magical 
strength, cannot visit several of these places in succession in order 

These options can, of course, be mixed and matched if Games 
to completely regenerate his Magic Points. Neither can a magician 

Masters desire, creating any number of custom variants that lend 
sacrifice several goats in sequence and add each offering together to 

a unique feel and character to how magic manifests itself in the 
fully top up. 

campaign. 

117



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

Masters may wish to limit the availability of certain abilities accord- 
CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs & MAaGgIiCc ing to cult rank, ensuring that characters learn the secrets of their 

MyTHRAS does not automatically assume that everyone can use path in a particular order, and withholding the most potent abilities 
magic or, even if they can, have access to it. Magic is not a right and until the cult deems them responsible enough to be trusted with such 
nor should it be. Achieving any skill in magic usually requires follow- knowledge. 
ing a career that teaches it as a specific discipline. This is certainly The values provided in the table are merely suggestions. These 
very true of the higher magical paths such as Animism and Sorcery. can be changed if necessary, dependent on the flow of Experience 
It may be possible for characters to have a smattering of Folk Magic Rolls permitted. Since they are important advancements both to 
spells if this fits with the setting and level of magic within it. Gen- personal power and progression within a tradition, their costs should 
erally magic should be something to be marvelled at, respected and be a significant investment. However, a character can break down 
feared. the total investment of time and Experience Rolls into instalments 

over several sessions of play. 

BEeCccoOmMIinNgG Aa MAaGgIiCcIiaAnN At some point magician characters are likely to have learned all 
the abilities provided by their cult, school or path. Depending upon 

Unless magic is ubiquitous within a campaign, not all characters 
the game world, this need not be the end of their magical develop- 

begin with the knowledge or capability to perform magic. As can 
ment. A character might be able to join a new cult, find another 

be seen in the Careers and Development chapter, the specific skills 
cache of sequestered knowledge or even seek tuition by a more 

required to learn magic are by default restricted to certain profes- 
renowned master. Such efforts require the starting of another skill 

sions. Of course that need not be the case in all settings, but it works 
specific to the philosophy of the new tradition. 

as a general guideline. 
There are a number of deliberations a Game Master must work 

out prior to allowing magic using characters to be created. ExPpeeErRieIEnNcCeE ROoLlLl AanNDd TIimMEe COoSsTtSs 

Magic Type Experience 
1Is the ability to use magic restricted to a particular inborn gift? If so: Rolls 

& Does the gift need to be nurtured during childhood to bring it Tolk Magic Cantrip/Charm 3 1 Week 

to fruition, or can it be trained at any time of life? Animism Spirit ) 1 Month 

& How extraordinary is the gift, is it commonplace or ultra rare? Mysticism Talent 5 1 Month 

& Does possession of the gift grant instant access to particular Sorcery Spell 5 1 Month 

cults or brotherhoods? Theism Miracle 5 1 Month 

& Are those that bear the gift persecuted if they do not engage 
in formal training? 

& If formal training is unavailable, can magicians teach LeEaArRnNIinNgG NEewW TRrAaDdIiTtIioOnNSs 
themselves? 

Nothing prevents a character from joining a new tradition, pro- 

1f magic is available to anyone provided they have the knowledge then: vided that: 

& Do cults, brotherhoods, and so on restrict access to it to pre- & The new tradition uses the same maggi1c al discippllinnee,,  for exam- 

serve their own power base? ple a theist cult can only join other theistic traditions 

& Ts membership of such an organisation restricted to a certain & There is no antippaatthhy y between the new tradition and anyy  oth- 

social class, career, culture, and so on? ers the character may already be a member of 

& How far is magic taught by the culture the character belongs & The Games Master is willing g too  p permit the character to Jj oin 

to? a new tradition 

This assumes that magic cannot simply be learned by anyone 
who decides to start studying it. In this case there may be no restric- 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MAaGgIiCc tion to joining traditions which teach new styles of magic, save for 
Characters permitted to learn magic start with knowing a num- the usual conflicts of interest. Games Masters should beware of 

ber of abilities (spells, miracles, spirits or talents) based upon the characters learning multiple magical disciplines if this does not suit 
value of the appropriate magical skill in that tradition (Binding, their campaign setting. 
Devotion, Folk Magic, Invocation or Mysticism). Once the game In general it takes six months of dedicated study and the per- 
begins they are restricted in what additional abilities they can learn, mission of its highest ranking masters, to gain the new tradition at 
and when they can learn them. its base percentage, and whatever initial spells or talents the student 

At character generation, a magician character knows one rel- is capable of learning. This costs the same amount of Experience 
evant spell or ability for each 20% (or part thereof) he has in his Rolls as would normally be required to learn whatever new Pro- 
magical skill. fessional skills are necessary for that tradition, plus the cost of each 

spell learned. 

LeEaArRnNIinNgG NEewW ABbILilIiTtIiEeSs 
Once a character enters the game, learning further abilities CRrEeAaTtIinNgG NEewW TRrAaDdIiTtIioOnNSs 

must be paid for by the investment of Experience Rolls, and a com- Some characters may wish to create their own religious or totemic 
mensurate amount of study time. As previously mentioned, Games cults, sorcery schools, mystical paths or any other type of tradition 

118



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

they conceive of. Existing traditions are complete philosophies and THhEe GAaMmEeSs MAaSTstEeRr’’Ss SaAgGaA 
cannot be added to without tremendous research and effort, which Afler choosing what sort of traditions to use, Steve must come to a decision 
would probably be resisted by the status quo of their masters. How- on how many abilities each magical tradition should provide. Steve decides 
ever, new traditions can be created with fewer problems, although that he’d like his setting’s cults, schools and paths to grant a wide range of 
progressing in this manner is inherently more expensive in time and powers. Selecting the Magic Ruch category allows each to provide between 
effort than following an existing one. 7-9 spells, sparits, and so on; tweaking the actual number dependent on the 

Thus it can sometimes take years, if not a lifetime, of dedicated importance and central role of the tradition. 
practice to formulate a new tradition in comparison to learning an Since Theism is the dominantf orm of magic in the campaign world, Steve 
established one. However, the practitioner who successfully creates also grants each divine cult an additional 7-9 Folk Magic charms in addition 
a new tradition would be its grandmaster and founder, ever remem- lo thewr full range of 7-9 miracles. This substantially augments the potency 
bered for his efforts. of theistic cults in comparison lo traditions based on other types of magic, but 

Steve thinks it will give his setting a uniquely distinetf lavour: 
CRrEeAaTtIinNgG NEewW TRrAaDdIiTtIioOnNSs 

Although Steve likes the idea of making all magwc long and difficult to 
Experience Rolls 

Ability Added Months Required Required cast, he_finally chooses to go with the default casting times but keeping the 
option to boost the casting chance if spending additional time in preparation; 

Ist 3 7 since he wants magic to be an actwve part of the to-and-fro of combat. 
2nd 6 13 

3rd 10 19 

4th 15 25 REeSsTtRrIicCtTeEdD ACcTtIioONnSs 
5th 21 31 

DuuUrrRiInNgG CAaSsTtIinNgG 
6th 28 37 

Whilst performing magic, no matter what discipline, characters 
7th 36 43 

are only able to: 
Each +1 + (Ability Number+1) +6 

& Move at a maximum of walking pace 
& Perform Free or Reactive Actions 

Therefore characters cannot attack any foes whilst preparing a 
UssIinNgG MAaGgIiCc spell, or make any attempt to run or indeed perform any other skill. 

MYyTHRAS uses a number of default assumptions concerning the This reflects the deliberation needed to focus on the spell and chan- 
casting of magic. Since the same fundamental concepts are utilised nel the energy for it to have its desired effect. 
by each discipline, they have been collated here for easy reference At the Games Master’s discretion, some reactive actions such as 
and avoid unnecessary duplication. parrying or evading may make completing a spell more difficult due 

The following rules are intended to be globally applied to all of to disruptions incurred to the normally required somatic gestures or 
the magical disciplines — namely Folk Magic, Animism, Mysticism, mental focus. 
Sorcery and Theism. However, as with all of the guidelines offered 
in this chapter, the Games Master is free to tinker with these as InNtTeErRrRuUPpTtIinNgG CAaSsTtIinNgG 
desired so that they fit with his play style and campaign setting. All types of magic have casting times measured in Turns. This 

means a magician performing more complex invocations can be 
slowed down in their casting by reacting to threats which eat up their 

CAaSsTtIinNgG REeQqUuIiRrEemMEeNnTtSs 
available Action Points. However, unless the caster suffers some dra- 

Whether the passionate entreaties of a theist calling upon his god 
matic shock, all this does is delay the final completion of the magic. 

or the esoteric hand movements of a mystic, all magical disciplines 
To totally disrupt casting normally requires that the magician be 

are assumed to use ritual words and gestures to aid in the focussing 
injured or mentally suborned. The chance of this depends on the 

of concentration required for their proper incantation. 
precise circumstances: 

By default the following freedoms are required: 

& Minor Wounds force the caster to make a Willpower check, 
& Clear thought, unclouded by detrimental magic, narcotics or 

failure makes the casting one difficulty grade harder 
emotional stress 

& Serious Wounds force the caster to make a Willpower check, 
& The ability to gesture or symbolise with at least one free hand 

passing makes the casting one grade harder, whilst failing 
& The ability to make appropriate vocal sounds to invoke the 

makes it two grades harder 
formulae or request 

& Major Wounds automatically causes the casting roll to fail 
& The ability to accurately perceive or sense a potential target, 

& Succumbing to mental domination automatically causes the 
if the spell has to be targeted 

casting roll to fail 
Where one or more of these are denied to a magician, each miss- 

ing element increases the difficulty grade of the appropriate magic 
skill. A hedge wizard who is bound and blindfolded could attempt DiissmmisissiiInNgG ONnE’e'’s OwNn MAaGgIiCc 
to cast Folk Magic, but does so at a Formidable grade. With enough Characters can dismiss any magic they have personally cast as 
penalties it may become impossible to perform any form of magic. a Iree Action. No roll is needed for dismissing a spell; simply the 

decision needed to cease its effects. 

119



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

STtaAcCKkIinNgG MAaGgIiCc THhEe GAaMmEeSs MAaSTstEeRr'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Continuing hus theme of Sword and Sorcery, Steve decides that magicians 

In all circumstances, magic of different disciplines cannot be 
are rare and exalted, requiring specialised trainingfrom childhood. Access to 

stacked together to produce greater effects. Thus a Folk Magic spell 
hagher magical powers s restricted to characters that pursue a spectfic magical 

cannot add its effect to that produced by a theist Miracle for exam- 
professiwon, spectfically those who take the mystic, priest, sorcerer or shaman 

ple. In addition, magic of the same discipline which has a similar 
career. However; he likes the idea of Folk Magic being somewhat more com- 

purpose cannot be stacked. So two weapon enhancement magics 
monplace, but restricted to those who those who devote themselves to a specific 

such as Fireblade and Bladesharp cannot work together. 
cult or possess a mentor willing to teach them. 

In situations where two incompatible spells are in simultaneous 
In his game the three main player characters are Anathaym, Kara and 

existence, the magic with the greater Intensity take precedence, sup- 
Mju. As part of her back-story during character generation, Kara began her 

pressing or subsuming the lesser magic. Where both magics are of 
adolescent life as a sacred dancer in the temple of Myceras where her natural 

equal Intensity, the newer magic replaces the previous one. 
affinaty with the god was recognised. So she was trained to enter the preesthood 
permatting her access to Theism. 

MAaGgNnIiTtUuDdEe AanNDd InNTtEeNnSsIitTyY Mju was born a mountain nomad under the constellation of the Jackal, 
These two terms are methods of describing the potency of nomenally a lowly caste of hunter-scavengers, but blessed by a lunar eclipse 

magic. Magnitude is used to see how difficult it is to dispel the magic and the falling of seven stars. This auspicious astrological sign destined him 
whereas Intensity reflects its level of effect. More detail concerning lo be educated as a mystic of the Path of Shadows. 
these terms is described for each discipline. Of the three only Anathaym starts with no magical skills, having trained 

Although Intensity (and sometimes Magnitude) are based upon since chaldhood to be as great a warrior as herf ather. Since she did not begin 
the value of a magical skill, they are not modified by any difficulty the campaign as a professional magician she can never adopt any of the higher 
grades applied to the casting roll. For example, the Intensity of a magical arts, but could stull learn some minor Folk Magic charms if shefinds 
sorcery spell is one tenth of the sorcerer’s Invocation skill, no matter the right cult to join. 
whether the casting roll is Easy, Hard or even Herculean.. 

Mjjuu’’s SaAgGaA 
EnNDdUuRrIinNGg MAaGgIiCc COossTtSs Mju starts the game as a student of the art of mysticism. He has a score 

As a general rule, the Magic Points attribute (or pool) of a magi- 
i Meditation of 52 %, and Mysticism (Path of Shadows) 57%. Thus 

cian is temporarily reduced by the cost of all his ongoing active he knows three mystical talents (one_for each 20% of his Mysticism skill). 
magic. He is unable to start recovering Magic Points used to cast a Affler several sessions and the completion of a major adventure, Myu finds 
spell (or similar ability) until that magic is dismissed or expires. humself with 5 Experience Rolls with which he wishes to learn another of 

the talents taught by the Path of Shadows. The Games Master however says 
that Mju has already learned all of the talents available to one of his lowly 
standing. If he wishes to progressf urther; he must prove himself worthy to his 
guru and be_formally promoted to the rank of disciple. 

Mju sighs patiently, and instead uses the Experience Rolls to improve his 
other skills, hoping to impress his master by diligently practicing in those areas 
the old guru is always complaining are lacking 

Later... 

Mju is a faithful disciple of the Path of Shadows, butfinds it does not 
teach all of the physicalf eats he wishes to learn. Encouraged by hus master; he 
decides to go into retreat and meditate upon a new path of mysticism. 

Studying on his own, in the remote depths of the desert plateau, Mju 
notices the plucky hittle mice that scamper and hop amongst the rocks. Exper:- 
encing an epiphany he uses the rodents as the source of his new path, attempt- 
ing lo mimic therr abilities. It takes hum 3 months of contemplation and 
practice, and 7 Experience Rolls, to emerge with his newly developed branch 
of mysticism, which he names the Path of the Jerboa. This starts at the base 
Mysticism percentage of POW=+CON; and he gains (chooses) thef urst talent. 

Seeking to_further his path, Mju remains in isolation, spending another 
6 months and 13 Experience Rolls o add a second talent. At this point he 
Jeels he has done enough and must now see how his new path will serve him 
in the world. 

120



