Mythras:  Careers

— 
= i X o2 M oK &oWOx i S (LK SO QR < A o IRV | = < gl 

Careers

pa— — 
= i X o2 M oK &oWOx j< 

Yy m KW S " &K K F R 
=] | IR o W 

his chapter develops the character’s skills through a profes- &K Select up to three skills from the Professional Skills available to that 
sion, possible cult membership, the allocation of Bonus Skill career. 

T Points, and some starting equipment, and determining what & Distribute 100 points amongst the career’s listed Standard Skills and 
magic the character might (or might not) possess. whatever Professional Skills were chosen, increasing each skill by 1% for 

every point spent on improving it. Not all of the available skills need to be 
improved, but no individual skill can recete more than 15%. 

CAaRrEeEeRrSs Newly chosen Combat Styles and Professional Skills start off at 

Every MYTHRAS character starts the game having been trained in their base characteristic value. Choosing a Style or Professional Skill 

a career. The occupation he chooses may not necessarily be the one previously gained via cultural background simply allows the char- 

he continues to follow as he begins his adventuring life, but it is the acter to further apply some of their career skill points at this stage. 

career he embarked on as part of the transition to adulthood, and it Some of these skills such as Craft, Language or Lore offer choice of 

further defines his skill development. a specialisation. In these cases the speciality selected should be one 

The careers available to a character are dependent on their which suits the character’s culture. 

cultural background; in some cultures the range of available occu- 
pations is quite narrow because the needs of the community are ExAaMmPpLlEe CAaRrEeEeRrSs bByY CUuLlTtuURrAaLl BAacCkKgGrRoOuUnNDd 

simple; or social traditions will push young adults along a certain 
Civilised Barbarian Nomad Primitive 

path. In others, the list is more diverse, reflecting a more complex 
Agent Beast Handler Beast Handler Beast Handler 

community with wider needs that have diversified over the centuries. 
Alchemist Crafter Crafter Crafter 

Players are nominally free to choose which career they wish their Beast Handler Entertainer Fisher Fisher 

character to learn, provided the Games Master deems it suitable. Courtesan Farmer Herder Hunter 

The following table gives some guidance as to the common types Courtier Fisher Hunter Physician 

of vocation available to each cultural type. It is not definitive and Crafter Herder Merchant Sailor 

Entertainer Hunter Official Scholar 
may differ significantly in more exotic game settings. For example a 

Farmer Merchant Physician Scout 
campaign based in a land where magicians are slain at birth could 

Fisher Miner Priest Shaman 
prohibit the selection of magic using professions. Herder Mystic Sailor Thief 

Similar to cultural backgrounds, each career offers the chance Hunter Official Scholar Warrior 

to improve a range of Standard and Professional Skills commonly Merchant Physician Scout 

utilised by that occupation. Some grant access to Magical Skills or Miner Priest Shaman 

extra Combat Styles. Unlike cultural backgrounds, characters need Mystic Sailor Thief 

Official Scholar Warrior 
not invest their points in every available skill, but may tailor which 

Physician Scout 
ones are taken as those fitting for their specific role or culture. 

Priest Shaman 
Characters develop their career skills in the following way: Sailor Thief 

Scholar Warrior 

Scout 

Shaman 

Sorcerer 

Thief 

Warrior 

28

Iv] 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

AGgEeNnTt ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Coming from a civilised city-state Anathaym has a wide selection of 

Agitator, Assassin, Detective, Informer, Spy... 
careers she could potentially follow. Indulged by her father she requests train- 

The work of an agent is to report upon, and operate covertly 
ing as a soldier;, the career he himself followed before retiring to a lfe of 

against those his employer wishes to keep an eye on. They watch, 
politics. Believing lus daughter will soon tire of the gruelling discipline, her 

discover, and act secretively. Anyone might be an agent — servants, 
Jather tolerantly agrees to apprentice her under the twition of weapon-master 

beggars, noblemen, even children. Likewise those that employ 
Lamotus, a_famous warrior: 

agents might be anybody from a jilted lover or struggling merchant 
To her father’s growing alarm, Anathaym flourishes under the guidance 

to the ruler of a nation. Agents mostly deal with passing of informa- 
of the aging master. From the Warrior career she selects the_following three 

tion or minor acts of sabotage, although a few sometimes perform 
professional skills: Lore — Mulitary History 28% (IN'T x2), Lore — Strategy 

assassination if the cause, or payment, is right. 
and Tactics 28% (INT x2), and Survwal 20% (CON+POW). 

SKkIiLlLlSs She then spends her 100 points, dividing it amongst the available career 
sklls thusly: Athletics +10, Endurance +10, Evade +10, Lore — Military 

& Standard Skills: Conceal, Deceit, Evade, Insight, Perception, History +10, Lore — Strategy and Tactics +10, Survwal +10, Unarmed 
Stealth; Combat Style (Concealable Weapons Style) +10, Combat Style (Meerish Slinger) +15, Combat Style (Meerish Infan- 

& Professional Skills: Culture (any), Disguise, Language (any), iry) +15 
Sleight, Streetwise, Survival, Track Her new Meerish Infantry combat style covers training in speay; hoplite 

shueld and javelin — something her tutor feels she’ll need to be proficient in if 
she wishes to join the ranks of the Meeros Scarlet Spears, the regiment her 

ALlCcHhEeMmIiSsTt Jather once commanded. 
Apothecary, Herbalist, Poisoner, Perfumer... Afier applying her career modifiers Anathaym’s skills are now: Athlet- 
Alchemists concern themselves with creating, or trading in, a s 37%, Boating 24%, Brawn 21%, Conceal 23%, Customs 68%, 

wide range of chemical and herbal substances which are used by the Dance 25%, Deceit 28%, Driwve 28%, Endurance 36%, Evade 42%, 
local community. These concoctions can vary in purpose — soaps, First Awd 30%, Influence 28%, Insigh3t1 %, Locale 33 %, Native Tongue 
polishes, dyes, disinfectants, acids, oils, unguents, perfumes, narcot- 63 %, Perception 21 %, Ride 23 %, Sing 16%, Stealth 30 %o, Swim 24 %, 
ics, medicines, poisons — the list is almost endless. The larger the Unarmed 27 %, Willpower 24 %o; Courtesy 38%, Lore (Geography) 38%, 
society they reside in, the more likely that the alchemist will special- Lore — Military Hustory 58%, Lore — Strategy and Tactics 38 %, Streetwise 
ise in making or selling one specific type of compound. 31%, and Survwal 30%; Combat Style (Meerish Slinger) 52 %o, Combat 

Style (Meerish Infantry) 42 %. 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

& Standard Skills: Customs, Endurance, First Aid, Insight, 
Locale, Perception, Willpower COoUuRrTtEeSsaAnN 

& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (Alchemy), Healing, Concubine, Escort, Harem-girl, Houri, Paramour... 

Language (any), Literacy, Lore (Specific Alchemical Special- Professional companions, courtesans make their living through 

ity!), Streetwise providing company, conversation, dance, singing, and sometimes 
other services to those who can afford it. The attitude towards cour- 
tesans can vary dramatically according to their culture, some are 

BeeEaAstT HAaNnDdLlEeRr little more than tavern girls only there to draw in customers, whilst 

Animal Breeder, Beast Tamer, Menagerie Keeper-... others are revered by the high ranking wealthy. The most famous 

Beast handlers make their living by capturing, trading, breeding, and skilled courtesans may literally have princes begging at their 

caring for, or domesticating creatures for a variety of different roles feet. Courtesans can be both male and female. 

in the community. Examples include horse-whisperers, falconers, 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

hound masters, snake wranglers, and the like. Some raise ostensibly 
wild animals for domesticated use, whilst others tend the beasts on & Standard Skills: Customs, Dance, Deceit, Influence, Insight, 
display in private menageries. A few even take captured beasts and Perception, Sing 
turn them into guardians, battlefield weapons, or competitors for pit & Professional Skills: Art (any), Courtesy, Culture (any), Gam- 
fights and gladiatorial events. bling, Language (any), Musicianship, Seduction 

SKkIiLlLlSs 

« Standard Skills: Drive, Endurance, First Aid, Influence, COoUuRrTtIiEerR 
Locale, Ride, Willpower Advisor, Conspirator, Delegate, Diplomat, Sycophant... 

& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (Animal Husbandry), Traditionally members of the gentility or nobility, courtiers are 

Healing (Specific Species), Lore (Specific Species), Survival, those summoned into the service of a ruler or government to act as 

Teach (Specific Species), Track an adviser, a companion, an aide or simply as a lackey. Chosen for 
their ability to be persuasive, insightful or discreet, they are often 
the power-brokers behind domestic and foreign policy. Some court- 
iers are in fact ambassadorial representatives from another, foreign 
nation. Courtiers see and hear much about the affairs of state, and 

1 Such as Acids, Narcotics, Poisons, etc. 

29



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

concerts or provide background music. Poets recite great works of 
CAaRrEeEeRrSs AanNDd SoccCIiaALl CLlAaSsSs literature, and lyric poetry, whereas singers perform choral works, 

MrrHRras does not impose any immediate restrictions on what careers often as choirs. Story-tellers recount apocryphal tales, and so on. 
are available to what social class but it s something players and Games Entertainers sometimes learn several complimentary arts to increase 
Masters may wish to consider. Some social classes will look down on their repertoire and create unique acts. For instance, a bard might 
members who practice certain vocations, risking censure or perhaps even combine the arts of music, singing and poetry. 
expulsion_from their rank. One culture maightforbid nobles becoming mer- 
chants due to the risk of financial corruption, whilst another may restrict SKkIiLlLlSs 
the practice to only those who are part of the nobility, creating an enclave 
of merchant princes. « Standard Skills: Athletics, Brawn, Dance, Deceit, Influence, 

Games Masters should decide tf a career is denied to a particular Insight, Sing 

soctal class, but some interesting roleplaying possibilities can present them- & Professional Skills: Acrobatics, Acting, Oratory, Musician- 

selves if a character decides to ignore social norms, and enter a vocation ship, Seduction, Sleight, Streetwise 

usually treated with disdain. How will that character be viewed: pioneer 
or social pariak? What are the consequences? How will the profession 
accept lum? These are all golden opportunities for roleplaying and plot FaArRmMEeRr 

Nd evelopment. 
Gardener, Estate Ouwner, Forager, Harvester, 

Ploughman... 
Farmers cultivate the land, raising or harvesting crops, but they 

may learn a great deal about politics and scandal in high places. are often generalists in a range of skills necessary for foraging or 

Whatever their political standing, the machinations of courtiers can maintaining their chattels. Usually their produce is food and other 

save or undermine a nation. useful flora, such as medicinal herbs or plants which produce fibres 
for clothing. Not all agriculturalists necessarily tend a farm or plan- 

SKkIiLlLlSs tation. Some wander through wild regions harvesting the naturally 
occurring vegetation, whilst others are employed to supervise formal 

& Standard Skills: Customs, Dance, Deceit, Influence, Insight, gardens for rich patrons. Likewise not all farmers are necessarily 
Locale, Perception yokels tied to a small pasture, orchard or vineyard. Many cultures 

& Professional Skills: Art (any), Bureaucracy, Courtesy, Culture may place high status on owners of large estates who manage the 
(any), Language (any), Lore (any), Oratory running of their property. 

SKkIiLlLlSs 
CRrAaFfTtEerR 

Artificer, Artisan... « Standard Skills: Athletics, Brawn, Drive, Endurance, Locale, 

Skilled artisans, professional craftsmen cover a huge range of Perception, Ride 

trades: from basket making through to weaving. Most craftsmen spe- & Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (any), Lore (Agricul- 

cialise in one particular area, but it is not uncommon to find those ture), Lore (Animal Husbandry), Navigation, Survival, Track 

skilled in a second field related to their primary craft. Some crafters 
have associated experience in buying materials and selling their own 
wares, depending on their scale of their business. Primitive crafters FIisShHeErR 
may simply be individuals who produce objects for their family or Beach Comber, Net Tender, Pearl Diver, Whaler... 

tribe. Civilised crafters on the other hand might be part of a fam- Fishermen work the waters, braving the elements and dangers 

ily enterprise or members of an official guild. Some crafts may be to bring back its bounty. Mostly they trawl for edible food, any- 

unavailable or illogical for particular cultures, such as a smith for thing from shellfish to whales. A few seek commodities other than 

primitives. food however, particularly valuable items like rare shells, pearls or 
even medicinal types of water plants. The social rank of fishermen 

SKkIiLlLlSs depends on the value of what they recover; a primitive island based 
culture for example, might grant high status to those who bring back 

& Standard Skills: Brawn, Drive, Influence, Insight, Locale, Per- the greatest amount or most dangerous produce. Fishermen do not 
ception, Willpower necessarily need boats, and neither are they tied to the sea. Many 

& Professional Skills: Art (any), Commerce, Craft (Primary), live beside lakes or along rivers, using nets, baskets, and weirs to trap 
Craft (Secondary), Engineering, Mechanisms, Streetwise their catch. 

SKkIiLlLlSs 
ENnTtEeRrTtAaIinNEerR 

Acrobat, Bard, Dancer, Player, Poet... & Standard Skills: Athletics, Boating, Endurance, Locale, Per- 

Professional entertainers, have a range of skills in which they ception, Stealth, Swim 

can specialise. Acrobats perform feats of balance, gymnastics, and & Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (Any), Lore (Primary 

hand-eye co-ordination. Actors present plays or ribald pantomimes. Catch?), Lore (Secondary Catch?), Navigation, Seamanship, 

Dancers entertain with diverse dances ranging from the erotic to Survival 

ceremonial. Musicians use their instruments to perform private 2 These represent different techniques off ishing, such as whaling, lobster potting, trawling, and so 

on. 

30



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

HEeRrDdEeRr SKkIiLlLlSs 

Breeder, Herdsman, Sacred Goose Tender, Wrangler... & Standard Skills: Boating, Drive, Deceit, Insight, Influence, 
Herders are those who raise and tend flocks of creatures, not Locale, Ride 

necessarily domesticated animals; anything from goats to migrating & Professional Skills: Commerce, Courtesy, Culture (any), Lan- 
mammoths. Most herdsmen spend days or even weeks out on the guage (any), Navigation, Seamanship, Streetwise 
plains or hills, ensuring their beasts have sufficient food and water, 
whilst also watching for predators. A herder does not necessarily 
raise his own livestock; some hire themselves out to escort herds MIiNnEeRr 
over large distances to far off markets or use their skills to purchase Prospector, Quarryman, Sapper, Well Digger... 
stock for less discerning customers. It can be a solitary profession, Miners are those who excavate the ground, for a number of rea- 
but herdsmen generally know the land, the seasons, and the habits sons. Some dig for ore and precious metals, a few seek out special 
of their animals. types of stone for building or statuary, whilst others dig to create 

catacombs or sewers, or to penctrate the defences of towns. What- 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

ever the purpose, miners are prepared to go deep into the ground, 

& Standard Skills: Endurance, First Aid, Insight, Locale, Per- risking life and limb. As a result, miners tend to be both physically 

ception, Ride; Combat Style (Specific Herding or Cultural and mentally strong; used to working in hot, cramped conditions for 

Style) hours on end. 

& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (Animal Husbandry), 
Healing (Specific Species), Navigation, Musicianship, Sur- SKkIiLlLlSs 

vival, Track « Standard Skills: Athletics, Brawn, Endurance, Locale, Per- 
ception, Sing, Willpower 

& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (Mining), Engineering, 
HUuNnTtEeRr Lore (Minerals), Mechanisms, Navigation (Underground), 

Forester, Poacher, Scavenger, Stalker, Trapper... Survival 
Responsible for finding, tracking, and killing creatures, the 

hunter, like the herder, is knowledgeable about the land and the 
behaviour of animals. A hunter may hunt in a variety of ways: sim- MyyssTtIiCc 
ple stalking, trap laying or driving creatures into pens. The purpose Guru, Hermit, llluminate, Master... 
of the hunt depends on the culture of the hunter. Most seek out Mystics are those who seek mastery of the world by the attain- 
prey for the simple purpose of gathering food, but some hunters ment of perfection, spiritual insight or by becoming inured to physi- 
specialise in the extermination of deadly predators or the culling cal discomfort. Depending on the culture from which they originate, 
of animals for valuable body parts: furs, horns or teeth for instance. mystics may be found as anything from reclusive mountaintop her- 
Hunters often learn a supplemental craft for preserving or skinning mits to respected teachers of martial or artistic schools. The path 
the creatures they kill. of their development is always via mastery of self, and most are 

sagacious as an result of their studies. 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

« Standard Skills: Athletics, Endurance, Locale, Perception, SKkIiLlLlSs 

Ride, Stealth; Combat Style (Specific Hunting or Cultural « Standard Skills: Athletics, Endurance, Evade, Insight, Percep- 
Style) tion, Willpower; Combat Style (Cultural Style) 

& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (Hunting Related), Lore & Professional Skills: Art (any), Folk Magic, Literacy, Lore (any), 
(Regional or Specific Species), Mechanisms, Navigation, Sur- Meditation, Musicianship, Mysticism 
vival, Track 

OFfFfIiCcIiaALl 
MEeRrCcHhAaNnTt Minister, Overseer, Steward, Tax Collector... 

Broker, Hawker, Money Lender, Smuggler, Trader... Officials are those appointed or elected to an office, charged with 
Merchants come in many forms: the street vendor, small shop- performing certain administrative duties and granted a degree of 

keeper, wily caravanserai, intrepid merchant-venturer, and many authority to ensure their commands are followed. Examples include 
more. Although their methods or merchandise are different, all have slave managers of large estates, guild masters, bureaucratic scribes, 
one thing in common: to trade commodities (be it goods, food, live- legal advocates or tax collectors. Depending on the size and com- 
stock, people, property or even money) for the highest profit. Mer- plexity of the organisation or government, most officials control a 
chants know a bargain, and how to drive a good one; and not all body of men to help perform their duties. 
trade in legal merchandise. Due to their dealings as middle men, 
many merchants pick up some knowledge of foreign cultures and 
languages. 

31



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

SKkIiLlLlSs SKkIiLlLlSs 

« Standard Skills: Customs, Deceit, Influence, Insight, Locale, & Standard Skills: Athletics, Boating, Brawn, Endurance, 
Perception, Willpower Locale, Swim; Combat Style (Specific Shipboard or Cultural 

& Professional Skills: Burcaucracy, Commerce, Courtesy, Lan- Style) 
guage (any), Literacy, Lore (any), Oratory & Professional Skills: Craft (Specific Shiphoard Speciality?), 

Cuulture (any), Language (any), Lore (any), Navigate, Seaman- 
ship, Survival 

PHhYySsIicCIiaAnN 
Doctor, Healer, Medicine Man, Torturer, Vivisectionist... 
Physicians have detailed knowledge of how the body works, ScChHOoLlAaRr 

although they do not necessarily use that learning to heal. Some Annalist, Librarian, Philosopher, Skald, Scribe... 
instead offer their skills to extract information by coercion, or fur- The keepers and seckers of knowledge and learning, scholars 
ther the depth of their education by questionable practices. A phy- and scribes are people who are fascinated by knowledge and the 
sician can take many guises, some examples being the medicine powers contained within it. Scholars are not necessarily confined 
man of a tribe with his totems and fetishes; a local hermit or wise to dusty libraries or suffocating scriptoriums; they may be active 
woman with their knowledge of herbs and poultices; or a court phy- explorers and archivists, intent on advancing their learning or col- 
sician who can cure fevers and agues with complex chemical reme- lections of tomes. Neither are they dependent on literacy to learn; 
dies. Depending on the sophistication of the culture, many doctors some scholars memorise and hand down their knowledge orally. 
embellish their treatments with ceremonial theatrics, bogus medica- Some scholars are specialists in particular areas of knowledge, such 
tions, and manipulative psychology. as a lawspeaker who is employed to memorise and quote legal codes 

during law cases. 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

SKkIiLlLlSs 
« Standard Skills: Dance, First Aid, Influence, Insight, Locale, 

Sing, Willpower « Standard Skills; Customs, Influence, Insight, Locale, Native 
& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (Specific Physiological Tongue, Perception, Willpower 

Speciality®), Healing, Language (any), Literacy, Lore (Specific & Professional Skills: Culture (any), Language (any), Literacy, 
Alchemical Speciality?), Streetwise Lore (Primary), Lore (Secondary), Oratory, Teach 

PRrIiEeSstT Scouurt 
Arbiter, Cultist, Druid, Mendicant, Prophet... Bounty Hunter, Explorer, Pioneer, Ranger, Wayfarer... 
Priests can take a variety of different roles in society; an official Scouts are those who thrive beyond the reach of their native 

leading worship of the gods, an illuminated seer leading followers civilisation. They may be pioneers seeking out new territory or 
on an exodus to find their god, an administrator in a theocracy, and rangers employed by the military to keep an eye on the borders. 
so on. Priests do not necessarily need to be religious or even believe Some are employed to seek out natural commodities which they sell 
in the faith they serve, whilst others might be granted miracles from to merchants of more settled lands, whilst others are hired to hunt 
their deity to reward suitable propitiation. down fugitives. A few are scholarly explorers, high ranked men seek- 

ing to document new cultures or simply folks cursed with chronic 
SKkIiLlLlSs wanderlust. Hardened by their life, scouts often live from what the 

land provides, understanding the plants, animals and seasons of the 
& Standard Skills: Customs, Dance, Deceit, Influence, Insight, 

wilderness they inhabit. 
Locale, Willpower 

& Professional Skills: Bureaucracy, Devotion (Pantheon, Cult or 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

God), Exhort, Folk Magic, Literacy, Lore (any), Oratory 
& Standard Skills: Athletics, Endurance, First Aid, Perception, 

Stealth, Swim; Combat Style (Specific Hunting or Cultural 
SaAIilLoOrR Style) 

Captain, Galley Slave, Marine, Pirate, Raft man... & Professional Skills: Culture (any), Healing, Language (any), 
Sailors and boatmen have a myriad of roles upon the lakes, riv- Lore (any), Navigation, Survival, Track 

ers, and seas, from the simple crew of a trading ship to hardened 
convict rowers. Those sailors employed as professional raiders or 
marines are often given shipboard combat training. Wise to the ways ShHaAmMAaNn 
of the waves, but superstitious with it, sailors are used to long dan- Animist, Diabolist, Exorcist, Madman, Witch Doctor... 
gerous travels, and the hardships that go with it. The medicine-man, the witch-doctor, the wise-woman: all can 

commune with the spirits and the ancestors; understanding the 

3 Prosthetics, Scrimshaw, Torture, Vivisection, etc. secrets of the spirit plane which lies over, under, and around the 

4 Such as Herbs, Medicines, Poisons etc. 5 Carpentry, Sail Making, Rope Making, etc. 

32



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

world we live in. The shaman has great insight and power, or so they 
would have you believe. Not all have magical powers, some merely CRrEeAaTtIinNgG Aa CustToOmM CAaRrEeEeRr 
follow the rituals and traditions handed down to them. Others are Players can create custom careers subject to the following guidelines: 

outright charlatans using trickery to fool the gullible members of & Agree the career with your Games Master. Your concept of 
their community. Despite the primitive associations, many civilised Death Knight Assassin’ might not fit with the themes and 
cultures also believe in the powers of the spirit world, propitiating style of the MrTHRAS game. 
dead ancestors for instance. & Standard Skills: Choose up to sewen Standard Skills and 

seven Professwnal Skills for the professwon, reflecting s 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

nature. Remember that magical abilities are considered Pro- 

« Standard Skills: Customs, Dance, Deceit, Influence, Insight, Jesswonal Skills. 
Locale, Willpower &K Also remember that Combat Styles are treated as Standard 

& Professional Skills: Binding (Ciult, Totem or Tradition), Folk Skalls. Try to avoid granting Combat Styles except to those 

Magic, Healing, Lore (any), Oratory, Sleight, Trance careers where physical conflict us a regular occurrence orfun- 
damental to surviwal. 

N P 
SoORrCcEeRrEerR 

Enchantress, Magi, Warlock, Witch, Wizard... 
The dedicated practitioners of sorcery who seek to control the WAaRrRrIioORr 

world around them through spells, incantations and rituals that are Bodyguard, Champion, Mercenary, Pit Fighter, Soldier... 

not necessarily tied to any gods or spirits, but directly alter the fab- Professional soldiers are the warrior class of a community; this is 

ric of reality. A sorcerer is often fascinated by all aspects of magic, the career of the fighting man. Most of their time is spent patrolling, 

driven to master its subtleties, and discover lost incantations. Some guarding and training — focusing on the use of weapons, close-quar- 

gain their power from a lifetime of studying dusty tomes, whereas ter tactics, and the study of enemy styles to make the most of any 

others might offer sacrifices to learn from the diabolic entities of for- future opportunities. The warrior may or may not follow a partic- 

bidden realms. A few are deceivers with no supernatural powers at ular martial code, and similarly he might focus on finesse or simple 

all, using legerdemain and prestidigitation to fool others into paying brute-force. 

them respect. 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

SKkIiLlLlSs & Standard Skills: Athletics, Brawn, Endurance, Evade, 

& Standard Skills: Customs, Deceit, Influence, Insight, Locale, Unarmed; Combat Style (Cultural Style®), Combat Style 

Perception, Willpower (Speciality Style’) 

& Professional Skills: Folk Magic, Invocation (Cult, School or & Professional Skills: Ciraft (any), Engineering, Gambling, Lore 

Grimoire), Language (any), Literacy, Lore (any), Shaping, (Military History), Lore (Strategy and Tactics), Oratory, 

Sleight Survival 

THhIiEeFf 
Burglar, Conman, Fence, Mugger, Tomb Robber... AGgEe 
Thieves are those who delight in stealing, or are forced to steal How old is your character? An Adventurer may start as young 

from others to support themselves. They range from petty criminals or old as the player desires, subject to the agreement of the Games 
who mug or pickpocket folk on the streets, to gang leaders and gold- Master. It is recommended that beginning characters start as youths 
en-tongued swindlers. Whilst thieves thrive in urban environments or young adults, but much depends on the setting, and whether 
they also exist in less civilised cultures too, operating as outlawed the game will be but a short one-off adventure or a long running 
brigands, and raiders of neighbouring tribes. Some thieves specialise campaign. 
in tomb robbing, stealing the grave goods of the dead. A few inde- A table is provided, breaking age into Age Categories. Note that 
pendently wealthy cutpurses and burglars are simply bored individ- this table can be used for non-human characters by simply substi- 
uals who thieve for adventurous excitement. tuting the actual number of years for longer or shorter lived races. 

A character’s age has a direct effect on their skill competence; as 
SKkIiLlLlSs older characters naturally have more life experience than younger 

compatriots. 
« Standard Skills: Athletics, Deceit, Evade, Insight, Perception, 

Stealth; Combat Style (Concealable Weapons Style) 
& Professional Skills: Acting, Commerce, Disguise, Lockpicking, 

Mechanisms, Sleight, Streetwise 
6 This is the warrior’s default starting g cultural style. 

7 Speciality styles are those catering to particular troop types, martal school or career (see Combat 

Styles on page 86 in the Combat chapter). 

33



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

To determine how old a character is, a player may either choose 
an age within the Age Category permitted, or simply roll the value STtaARrTtIinNgG EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 
randomly. Every character begins with some starting money and starting 

equipment, determined by their culture and social class. In addition 
they may augment their belongings by buying additional items (or 

AGgEe TAaBbLlEe upgrading ones they already have) from the Equipment section of 
this book. 

Bonus Maximum 
Age . . Background The table on page 35 gives some examples of personal posses- 

Age Skill Skill 
Category . Event Rolls 

Points Increase sions available to a character of that social class. These are merely 
guidelines, and are open to change according to the campaign or 

Young 1d6+10 100 +10 0 
setting. 

Adult 2d6+15 150 2FilH 1 

Middle Aged 3d6+25 200 +20 2 
ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 

Senior* 4d6+40 250 +25 3 
As a member of the aristocracy Anathaym begins the game with the 

Oo1d* 5d6+60 300 +30 4 
Jollowing: 

Four sets of good quality clothing: a court dress, day, and evening wear 
and a_formal gown. Mostly though, she opts for a simple, but well-made, 

AGgEe TAaBbLlEe NOoTtEeSs tunic akin to the kind worn by Meerish soldiers. 
Bonus Skill Points determines how many additional skill points the Four weapons, chosen_from her father’s armoury: a shorisword, dagger; 

character has to spend on developing hus skills — see thefollowing section. spear; and shield. Her sling she makes herself from a length of strong leather: 

Maximum Skill Increase limils how many of the Bonus Poinls can A st of Meerish Hoplite armour - again chosen from her father’s 
armoury. Although the protective value is determined by 1d3+3 roll, the 

be applied to any one particular skill. 
Games Master declares that Anathaym s given a mixture of leather and 

Background Event Rolls are used for characters starting at different 
bronze with appropriate Armour Point values. 

ages, requiring the player to potentially roll additional times on the Background She also has a horse, chosenfrom thefamily stables. Anathaym’s mount is 
Event Table in the Culture and Commumnily chapter. a chestnut gelding named Arrow, for lis speed and sharp temper. 

*Ageing: If a character is Senwr or older he is subject to Ageing; see the 

rules for Ageing on page 70. 

CLloOTtHhIinNgG 
Finery and decorations are dependent on the culture and its 

BoNnuss SxkiilLlL POoIiNnTtSs climate. The higher the class the more exclusive the fabric used 

At this stage every character gains an additional pool of ‘free’ in its manufacture. An example would be rough spun wool for the 

skill points based on age, which can be distributed amongst his exist- poor, followed by linens, brocades, and silks as social class or wealth 

ing skills. These are provided so that the character can be rounded increases. In a land full of silk worms and no sheep, these relative 

out, and given particular interests or areas of expertise. The default values may be reversed. Decorations are also culturally dependent. 

for adult characters is a pool of 150 points, with a limit of assigning Teathers may be the height of décor for a primitive tribe, whilst 

no more than 15 points per skill. If characters are younger or older, embroidery using gold threads may be de riguer for a barbarian 

then the number of Skill Points and restrictions will differ, as previ- king. Example decorations are fabrics of bright or rare colours, 

ously indicated on the Age Table. the attachment of precious substances, pelts or fur trims, detailed 

The number of Bonus Skill Points does not necessarily need to embroidery and pattern woven fabrics. 

be tied to age. If the characters are to be seasoned veterans, cultural 
WEeAaPpOoNnSs 

heroes or even the sons of gods, the Games Master is free to grant 
Not everyone in a society is expected to be armed; in fact some 

additional points or modify the maximum number which can be 
cultures expressly forbid weapons to those of a particular class or 

applied to a specific skill. 
caste. The most common weapons are usually simple and inexpen- 

Bonus Skill Points are used in the following way: 
sive; spears and axes for example which can be mass produced or 

& Allow the character the option of choosing one final new improvised. Only the higher classes tend to have ‘prestige’ weap- 

Combat Style or Professional Skill, reflecting a personal ons such as swords which require significant amounts of time to 

hobby or interest. manufacture. 

& Distribute points amongst whatever skills the character cur- 
rently has; increasing each skill by 1% for every point spent ARrmMOoUuRr 
on improving it. No individual skill can receive more points Perhaps even more restricted than weaponry, few members of 

than indicated by their Age Category. the lower classes possess armour, and what they own is usually hand 

Save for the optional hobby skill, no points may be assigned to crafted from fabrics or leather by their own family. Culture and 

those Combat Styles or Professional Skills not learned as part environment plays a big part in who is expected to own armour, 

of their Culture or Career. for example it would be rare to see common folk of a city storing 
armour at home, whereas it might be ubiquitous amongst a tribe of 
horse nomads. Metallic armours tend to be restricted to the wealthy 

34



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

BAacCkKgGrRoOuUnNdD EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt TAaBbLlEe 

Clothing Transport 

Roll 1d6-3. If the result is greater than 
One well used weapon of a 

One set of ragged, probably dirty zero the outworn armour is worth that 
Exile provenance suitable to the None 

clothes .. many AP, and covers 1d3 locations. 
character’s origin 

Otherwise no armour is owned 

One or two sets of clothes of a 

Slave quality suitable for the position and ~ None None None 

type of work performed by the slave 

Roll 1d3. This represents the Armour 
Two sets of common, undecorated ~ 1d2 simple weapons suited to the 

Points for the armour the character Own back, Raft, Handcart or 
Freeman clothes suitable to the freeman’s culture. Axes, clubs, knives, spears, 

has. Armour is available to cover 1d6 Beast of Burden 
occupation slings, and the like 

locations 

. 1d3+1 weapons of higher status, 
1d6+1 sets of clothing, made of . 

) . and/or quality. Swords, maces, Tull set of protection worth 1d2+2 Hired or Slave Porter, Boat, 
Gentry good quality fabrics and a modest . 

) shields, bows, great weapons, and Armour Points Wagon or Riding Mount 
level of decoration 

50 on 

1d6+3 sets of clothing, made of . . 
. . . . 1d3+3 weapons of expensive quality, Tull set of protection worth 1d2+3 Palanquin, Ship, Chariot or 

Aristocracy expensive fabrics and sporting lots . . 
. decorated with precious substances Armour Points Several Fine Mounts 

of decoration 

Expensive Palanquin with 
1d6+6 sets of clothing, made of 1d3+6 weapons of exquisite 

Tull set of protection worth 1d2+4 matched Bearers, Warship, 
Ruling rare, priceless materials and as craftsmanship, each of which are 

Armour Points Exquisite Carriage or Several 
opulent as good taste allows priceless due to heredity or materials 

Magnificent Mounts 

or those of noble class, and are often passed down as heirlooms. 
FoLlk MAaGgIiCc 

However, culture and setting might restrict the type of armour avail- 
Usually only learned by petty magicians or common folk in lands 

able to upper classes; for example the sons of a primitive tribal chief- 
where magic is ubiquitous, folk magic has minor effects upon the 

tain might not have access to iron mail hauberks, but could conceiv- 
world, outshone in comparison to the higher arts, but can be potent 

ably possess a type of hoplite plate carved from the bones or scales 
for all that. Folk magic originates from, and is connected to, the nat- 

of monsters instead. 
ural world, and the emotions of those within it. The ability to use 

TRrAaNnSsPpoORrTt folk magic is controlled by the skill of the same name. 

Choose a vessel or mount suited to the culture or environment 
the character comes from. Examples are given based upon the pri- ANnIiMmIisSmM 
mary mode of travel: foot, vessel, wheeled or mount. Some inter- Animists derive their magic from the summoning and control of 
pretation or leeway may be required, for instance a freeman from spirits and other supernatural creatures. These beings of the oth- 
a nomadic society might be expected to at least own a mount, or erworld are negotiated with or enslaved at the animist’s determi- 
perhaps it is something loaned to him by the patron or patriarch of nation, forming agreements with allied spirits or binding the less 
his family. willing into fetishes for later use. In exchange the animist must follow 

strict taboos or fulfil binding contracts. Animism relies on the skills 
of Trance and Binding. 

MAaGgIiCc 
MyTHRAS offers several different types of magic. Whether char- MYySsTtIicCiIsSmM 

acters begin play with access to these arts depends on their cultural Mystics draw their magic from the knowledge of self mastery 

background, starting career, and the accessibility of magic in the and understanding. Their insight into the inner self allows them to 

setting. More information on the kinds of magic available, how they achieve incredible acts of mental and physical excellence, making 

differ, how they work and the spells or abilities they begin with is them difficult to defeat in direct confrontation. Whilst their magic 

given later in the respective magic chapters. For now, it is necessary does not extend beyond themselves, they themselves become a tool 

only to know what sort of magic, if any, a character has learned, to manipulate the world about them. Mysticism uses the skill of the 

rather than a detailed knowledge of how it works. same name in addition to Meditation. 

35



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

SoORrCcEeRrYy CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr CRrEeAaTtIioOnN COoMmPpLlEeTtEe 
Sorcerers express their magical abilities by twisting the laws of Waorking through the fust three chaplers should now 

the world using the invocation of powerful spells. Whilst sorcery is have leftyou with a well-rounded, competent character with 
exceptionally flexible, it can often be unbound or dismissed by the an established culture, career; communaty and back-story. 
strength of other magics. Yet their independence from supernatural You have everythingyou need to begin play. 
beings means sorcerers never need to rely on anyone but themselves. Hopefully the character creation process will have also 
Sorcery uses the skills of Invocation and Shaping. set you thinking about your character's lfe, history and 

aspirations. What does he want from life? Why s she 

THhEeIisSmM adventuring? What are the things driving this character to 
 

rusk life and Limb? 
Theists are those who are rewarded with power from the gods in 

These are not questions that need to be answered imme- 
exchange for loyalty and service. Their miracles are potent as 

diately. Many answers will suggest themselves through 
they merely channel their gods’ own divine power, and can 

play, and one of the joys of MYTHRAS s discovering more 
be utterly devastating. Yet maintaining the bond requires 

aboutyour character as he or she develops in experience and 
continual dedication and constant sacrifices to ensure the 

maturity. 
deity remains appeased, or at least aware of their worship- 
per. Theism requires the skills of Devotion and Exhort. n 4 

Curlt MEeMmBEbeRrSsHhIiPp 
An optional stage for character development is cult 

or brotherhood membership. Many cultures of all types 
initiate their young adults into a cult or other form of 
social organisation as a rite of passage. If the character 
joins a cult it is likely one that either reflects the faith 
and beliefs of their family or their choice of career. 
Cuults and Brotherhoods offer access to training, and 
perhaps magic as well as providing a social, cultural, 
and professional network that characters will 
find useful. 

Cults and Brotherhoods are covered 
at length in their own chapter beginning 
on page 192. If Games Masters allow cult 
membership at this stage of character cre- 
ation it is suggested that no character should 
have a rank higher than Common Member. 

A hoplite from Meeros. He carres the 
traditional shortspear; scimitar, and sheeld of 
the 6th cohort. The crest on hus helm marks 
him as a sergeant, and the stylised symbol 
on his shield as an imitiate of the warrior 
cult of Myceras. 

36



