Mythras:  Economics & Equipment

o — 
= YY % &W T S LU SO GO << A o IR UL AR | < < 

Economics & 

Equipment
o — 

T= Y5Y  X 2 M oK &ow i S LU SO GO << A o IR UL AR | < < 

his chapter is concerned with money: how much characters 
have, and what it buys. MYTHRAS uses the Silver Piece (SP) as InNcCoOMmEe,, LIivViInNgG 

T the standard unit of currency in the game, with the cost of 
most equipment, goods and services being measured in SP. One Sil- StTaAnNdDAaRrDdSs AanNDd CLlAaSsSs 
ver Piece is the standard price for one day’s food, drink, and accom- A character’s income is a reflection of how much he makes in 

modation for one person, of stark quality; that is to say, breakfast a given period of time. Whilst income equates to wealth, it is most 

and an evening meal, with some form of cheap beverage, and a common for average workers to generate income not in terms of 

place to sleep for the night. coin, but in terms of food and shelter, or access to land which, if 

It therefore costs a character around 7 SP a week personally to tended, annually generates an amount per year equivalent to their 

live at subsistence level. Depending on where the characters are yearly income in terms of coinage. Other common forms of rec- 

located, coinage may not even be used (or may be viewed with suspi- ompense include training — magical and mundane — favours, and 

cion). Some cultures value barter and payment in kind more favour- trade in kind. 

ably than the chink of silver. Civilised cultures are most likely to use coinage for income and 

Other coins are available as well. The standard currency for expenditure — although only those social classes with any form of 

MyTHRAS consists of the Copper Piece, Silver Piece and Gold Piece. prosperity will use coins on a frequent basis. Lowly classes will rely 

The exchange rate is: on barter, favours, and payments-in-kind for most transactions, with 
coins being a rare and treasured luxury. 

& 10 Coppers = 1 Silver An individual’s standard of living is determined by their total 
& 100 Silvers = 1 Gold expenditure each year on essentials: food, drink, lodging, clothes, 

Thus a single Gold Piece would provide a MYTHRAS character gifts, and so on. It is natural for most people to spend nearly all their 

with reasonable food for 100 days. Three or four Gold Pieces would income achieving, or maintaining, the highest possible standard of 

see a character roughly all the way through the year, if he is frugal. living that they can. Note that this income may be required to sup- 

Some cultures, typically farming, nomad and barbarian commu- port any additional dependents they may have, such as children, 

nities, measure wealth in terms of livestock. A single large herd ani- household servants or perhaps even a troop of personal guards. 

mal, such as a cow, is worth around 100 SP. A pig or sheep is worth Those who spend more are likely to be at the top of their social 

around 25 SP, and a flock of hens around 15 SP. class; those who are frugal and pinch pennies can exist on about 
25% less than the amounts listed in the Social Class table, and will 
save some of their income, but may show a lower standard of living 
for their class. 

Anyone seeking to be socially mobile must increase their living 
ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA expenditures accordingly. Note, though, that social rank often does 

As MrTHRAS is not setting-spectfic the names of coins are very generic, but not rely on comparatively equal incomes. A barbarian chieftain may 
Games Masters should create something evocativefor their coinage. very well be accorded more respect, and wield more power, than a 

Silvers could, for example, be shillings, royals, pounds, and so on. Coppers civilised rich noble, yet have nowhere near the same income in terms 
could be penmes, bits orf arthings. Gold could be wheels, Imperials or some- of cash and value in property. 
thing equally grandiloquent. The Minimum Maintenance Costs table opposite compares the 

In Meeros the copper prece is known as an Obol, the silver as a Drachm, minimum required expenditures required over time to maintain the 
and a gold a Zarig. standard of living for that social class. It does not necessarily indicate 

54

L 
hL4 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcCoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 

the actual amount a member of that social class earns, which can be 
higher, but it can be used as a basis for deciding how much money 
a particular social class may have available in ready coin or other 
commodities. 

Social SP per SP per SP per . 
Typical Home 

Class Day Week Year* 

Exile Lives a hand to mouth existence None/Lives Rough 

Slave 1 7 370, Shared Shack/Hut 

Hut/Cabin/ 
Freeman 2 15 750 

Rented Room 

Gentry 10 75 3,750 House/Apartment 

. Large Villa/ 
Aristocracy 50 350 20,000 . 

Mansion 

Ruling 250 1,750 100,000 Palaces/Estates 

*Depends on the campaign setting Assumes a year length of roughly 360 days with 

totals rounded up for neatness 

CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr InNcCoOmMEe 

BEetTwWEeEenN ADdVvEeNnTtUuRrIinNGg 
Characters are unlikely to spend all their time adventuring and, 

between adventures, will be engaged in professional and cultural means in order lo prevent himself dropping a social class, perhaps being forced 
pursuits. Characters can therefore expect some form of income into servitude as a slave to pay off lus debls. 
from ‘normal’ day to day business according to their social class. Characters can expect to spend the income indicated in the 

Tor example a noble might earn a regular income from taxing Minimum Maintenance Costs table on general living expenses. Of 
the inhabitants of his lands, or receive a stipend from his father, course, they can squander any windfall or spend less if prepared 
requiring no direct involvement on his part; whereas a baker might potentially to drop their living standards, albeit at the risk of their 
be employed slavishly baking loaves every day. reputation suffering in some form. 
A character can expect to earn an applicable SP amount for his 

profession and social class. This assumes all is well in the world and 
no disasters, natural or otherwise, have affected the ability to gen- 
erate income. However, if a more accurate reflection of downtime BAaRrTtEeRrIinNgG aAnNDd 
income is needed, roll on the Seasonal Income table adjusting the 
1d100 roll as follows: HAaGgGgLlIinNGg 

In most societies shopping for services or goods is rarely straight- 

SeEaAsSoOnNAaLl InNcCoOmMEe TAaBbLlEe forward. Coinage tends to be confined to civilised cultures, but in 

1d100 Profitability primitive, barbarian and nomad cultures, barter is far more com- 
mon. Even where currency is actually used, traders rarely sell any- 

01-10 Disastrous: Reduce Income by 50% 
thing for a ‘standard’ price, as the value of most objects is subjective, 

11-20 Poor: Reduce Income by 25% 
and most purchases are haggled over. 

21-60 Normal: No adjustment to Income 
As was once wisely said, an item is only as valuable as the amount 

61-80 Prosperous: Increase Income by 25% 
somebody will pay for it. 

81-00 Very Prosperous: Increase Income by 50% 

The table represents the downtime profitability during the length BAaRrTtEeRrIinNgG 
of time the character was working or supervising his holdings, any- Bartering successfully depends on tendering something someone 

thing from several days to a year. During this period any number of else needs in exchange for what is being offered. A civilised character 

things may have occurred from the failure of a harvest or theft of his in a barbarian stead might offer coins in exchange for food, but coin- 

property, through to an unexpected demand for particular produce age does not necessarily offer any immediate advantage to the bar- 

or the expansion of a business. barian. To barter successfully then, the character must have some- 

For example, a self-employed Baker (a_freeman) might expect to earn 30 SP thing the other party finds valuable in their normal environment. 

in a week under normal circumstances. The 1d100 result is 06. One winter s Trading in kind usually works well: offering to chop wood for a 

especially bad, and the price of grain is driven up due to shortages, forcing the morning in exchange for a bowl of stew and a bed for the night, for 

baker to absorb the majority of the loss in order to keep his customers. The baker example. More complex or specialised goods and services are less 

only earns 50% of hus usual Seasonal amount, for a total of 15 SE which likely to succeed — unless the character can convince the other party 

Jortunately is just enough to keep supporting lisf amaly, and business. If his basic of the need and utility. 

income had been less then he might have had to sell his bakery or resort to illicit 

5o



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcCoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA Influence or Commerce against Willpower or Commerce. The out- 

Anathaym decides she wishes to purchase a new sword. Venturing to the come of the roll is determined by the difference in success levels 

bronzesmuth’s quarter in Meeros, she spots an intriguing blade suited to her between buyer and seller: 

lastes, and begins to bargain with the seller. The Games Master decides to 
HAaGgGgLlIinNgG OuuTtCcoOMmEe TAaBbLlEe 

use the Haggling rules which requare resolution based on a differential roll. 
Anathaym has an Influence skill of 28% which the merchant opposes with Difference in Levels of Purchaser gains 

s Advantage Seller gains Advantage 

his Commerce skill of 63 %. 
The dice are rolled. Whilst Anathaym manages to succeed in her Influence 5 25% of the Standard 200% of the Standard 

10ll, the merchant Criticals his, resulting in the seller winning by one level of Price Price 

success. According to the Haggling Outcome Table this means that although 50% of the Standard 150% of the Standard 

Anathaym negotiates well, the merchant’s impressive sales pitch convinces her : Price Price 

lo pay a quarter over the normal pricefor such a weapon. Anathaym considers | 75% of the Standard 125% of the Standard 

herself fortunate however, if she hadf ailed the roll the merchant would have Price Price 

won by two levels of success, which would have been even more expensive! Equal Standard Price Standard Price 

Bartering works in the following way: 

& The character makes an offer of something. If this is a com- 
mon commodity or an essential service appropriate to the EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 
other party that is obviously going to be of benefit, then the The remainder of this chapter is given over to equipment: 

barter succeeds. armour, weapons, clothing, tools and other sundries characters rely 

If the character is intending to offer something of less obvi- on when adventuring. 

ous value/utility or something esoteric, then he makes a Cus- Any piece of equipment is described in terms of one or more 

toms or relevant Culture roll. If successful, he has spotted a elements (some apply more than others). These are: 

way of pointing out benefits not realised by the other party. & Cost (in SP or CP) 
This changes the difficulty grade of either Influence or Com- 

& Armour Points: the natural resilience of the item to damage 
merce, whichever is being used to effect the transaction. 

& Hit Points: how much damage the item can sustain before 
being destroyed or rendered useless 

BAaRrTtEerR MOoDIdFifIiEeRr TAaBbLlEe & Encumbrance: how much the item contributes to Encum- 

Customs/Culture Influence Bonus Commerce Bonus brance (see page 77) limits; a combined measure of weight, 

Ciritical Easy Very Easy mass, and restriction 

Success Standard Easy Some items, typically clothing, and very small, light things, have 
TFailure Hard Standard only cost listed: it can be assumed that such things do not contrib- 
Fumble Formidable Hard ute towards Encumbrance limits and can be damaged relatively 

casily. Others, such as weapons, armour, and tools, display all four 

& Next the character makes an Opposed Influence or Com- elements. 

merce roll. The other party resists with either Willpower or 
Commerce - whichever is higher. EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt PRrIicCEe 

& If the character wins the Opposed roll, what he offers is 
All items listed in this chapter represent standard quality exam- 

accepted. If he fails, it is not. If the Adventurer fumbles the 
ples. Items of better or worse quality are available at an either an 

opposed roll, then there is a good chance he has insulted the 
inflated or reduced cost. The section on Equipment Quality, starting 

other party, meaning that offence has been taken, even if not 
on page 65, provides guidance on costs, enhancements/drawbacks 

intentionally offered. 
or higher and lower quality goods. 

The prices quoted assume availability is good. When there is a 
short supply of something, prices will rise and, depending on the 

HAaGgGgLlIinNGg commodity, may be anywhere between 10% and 1000% higher than 
Reducing a price to a reasonable amount is known as Haggling. quoted (1d100x10%). The environment, too, will affect availability 

In some cultures haggling is a major source of social interaction, a and therefore cost. Items, and commodities are generally easier and 
prime source of daily entertainment. A skilled negotiator can achieve cheaper to obtain in larger settlements with established markets and 
substantial discounts through careful haggling, although it is rare for 

traders. In remote or rural areas all but the most basic of locally 
any seller to allow themselves to make a loss on any transaction. produced goods and foodstufts will be more difficult to obtain; and 
To do so on a regular basis would soon place them out of business. will command a higher price, if available at all. 
Prices listed in the Equipment section assume a ‘standard’ profit 
margin for the seller, enough to reasonably support themselves. 

The process works in a slightly different way from Bartering, in 
that participants use Insight rather than Customs to gain an advan- 
tage in the negotiation. This is followed by a Differential Roll of 

56



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 

helm made from sewing boar tusks to a leather cap, or a suit of half- 
CUuLlTtUuRrEe/MILilIiEeuU 

plate from cuir bouilli dinosaur leather or carved jade. Of course 
Depending on the setting for your MYTHRAS game, not all items 

some materials are stronger than others; a bronze breastplate will be 
will be available. One would not expect clockwork mechanisms or 

thinner and lighter than an equivalent made from rhino hide. Thus 
wheeled vehicles to be available in a MYTHRAS setting modelled on 

the material used to manufacture the armour affects its Encum- 
Ancient Mesoamerica, for example. Equipment is therefore pro- 

brance (ENC). 
vided with a Culture/Milieu classification to help Games Masters 

No matter what material the armour is made of], it cannot be 
identify what is and isn’t available in a particular setting. This is a 

layered with other types — such concepts are already incorporated as 
rough guide only, but one that helps recreate an authentic atmo- 

part of its construction. Armour is assumed to come with whatever 
sphere (if one is needed; your MYTHRAS setting may be deliberately 

lining or padding would normally be expected as part of the com- 
anachronistic). 

plete panoply. 
The Culture/Milieu classifications are: 

Each type of armour is defined by the following qualities: 

& Prehistoric (P): Ttems likely to be found in settings and cul- 
& AP: The number of armour points given to each location 

tures that have not progressed much beyond the Stone Age. 
covered by this armour. If a character is wearing multiple 

& Ancient (A): Ttems likely to be available in settings and cul- 
pieces of armour on a location, only the highest armour point 

tures equating to the Bronze and Iron Ages. 
score is used although the ENC incurred is cumulative. 

& Medieval (M): Ttems likely to be available in settings and cul- 
& ENC: The typical weight and bulk of the armour. Use 

ture equating to the European Middle Ages. 
the Material Types table to adjust ENC for more unusual 

& Renaissance (R): Ttems likely to be available to settings and 
materials. 

cultures equating to the European Renaissance. 
& Cost: The cost, in Silver Pieces, per location covered. Price 

& Enlightenment (E): Ttems likely to be available in settings and 
assumes the armour is made from common local material, 

cultures equating to the European Age of Enlightenment 
more exotic substances increase this cost. 

(17th and 18th Centuries). 
& Milieu: Typical milieus where this type of armour occurs. 

& Industrial (I): Ttems found in settings and cultures that have 
embarked on an Industrial Revolution. The Armour Table lists each of the characteristics by armour 

type, and also summarises the encumbrance and cost for a full suit, 
covering all seven Hit Locations, for the armour in question assum- 
ing construction from standard materials. The Armour Penalty for a 

ARrmMOoUuRr full suit of the same armour is given in parentheses. 
In the Material Types table, no cost adjustments are given for the 

Worn for protection against physical harm, armour reduces the 
amount of damage a Hit Location sustains by its Armour Point construction of armour from more unusual materials, only its effect 

on ENC. The availability and additional cost of such substances 
value. Armour of any kind therefore offers a significant advantage 

is wholly dependent on the campaign setting. For instance, chitin 
in combat, and helps improve the chances of survival. The downside 
to armour is that it can be heavy and restrictive to movement; fight- armour would be impossible in a game where giant insects did not 

exist. Likewise if chitin is only available to primitive or hostile cul- 
ing for a sustained period in metal armour takes its toll in terms of 

tures, it might be vastly more expensive for someone in a civilised 
fatigue, and also slows down the ability to react. 

Armour is ranked according to the manner in which it is con- culture to purchase armour made from the material, assuming 
somebody in the city could actually craft or import it. On the other 

structed and overall coverage, not the actual material it was made 
from. For example it is perfectly permissible to manufacture a scaled hand, it might be the default armour substance for tribesmen lack- 

ing metallurgy. 

LiInNoOtThHoOrRaAxX BEeZzAaIinNTteEdD CHhAaIiNnMmAaIiLl HoorpLliiTte CUuIiRrAaSsSs 

57



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt 

ARrMmOoUuRr TAaBbLlEe 

Base . Cost per Suit ENC/Cost/ Armour . 
. Construction Example . Milieu 

Material Location Penalty 

Natural/Cured Furs, Hides 1 2 20 14/140/3 Any 

Padded/Quilted Aketon, Gambeson 2 1 80 7/560/2 Any 
Flexible 

Laminated Linothorax, Bezainted 3 2 180 14/1260/3 A-M 

Scaled Brigandine, Lamellar 4 3 320 21/2240/5 A-R 

Half Plate Hoplite Plate 5 4 500 28/3500/6 A-R 

Rieid Mail Mail Hauberk, Laminar 6 5] 900 30/6300/7 A-R 
fest 

Plated Mail Splinted Chainmail 7 6 1400 42/9800/9 M-E 

Articulated Plate Gothic Plate 8 7 2400 49/16800/10 M-E 

MMAaTtEeRrIiAaLl  TTyyPpeess  TTaasbLlee ARrmMOoUuRr AanNDd SIZ 
ENC Flexible armour will generally fit one point of SIZ more or less 

Material Modifier Notes than the SIZ it was designed for. Rigid armour is crafted to fit a 

Bulky though light, desiccated bone can be used in wearer of specific proportions, so it will only fit the same SIZ and 
B 1.5 . . . 
one * Laminated, Scaled, and Plate construction frame for which it has been demgned. 

. i Bronze, like iron, is considered the default material for 
ronze X . 

sigd armour ARrmMOoUuRr PEeNnAaLlTtYy tToO InNIitTiIaAtTIivVeE 
Lighter than other rigid materials it can be used for Armour can be heavy and impede movement to some degree. 

Chitin «0.75  Laminated, Scaled, and Plate armours. Chitin can The vast bulk of those who train in weapons also train in armour, 
only be carved however, not moulded, so large armour and so become accustomed to armour’s rigours, but this does not 
segments must come from insects of suitable size mean they are free from its more restrictive effects. 

. o i considered the default MyTHRAS simulates this through the Initiative Penalty. The more 
ezl for mgt TS armour one wears, and the heavier or more encumbering it is, the 

Tory <los  leethand tusks can be fashioned as part of greater the Initiative Penalty. This penalty is applied to a character’s 
Laminated, Scaled, and Plate Initiative. Its calculation is simple enough; add together the ENC for 
Leather can be tanned or boiled to make it rigid, and all the armour worn, and then divide by 5, rounding up. A full suit 
thus used in the construction of any armour save mail, of plated mail, having an ENC of 6 per location, and covering seven 

Leather x2 providing it is thick enough; crocodile skin fora  suit of locations has an Armour Penalty of (6X7)/5 = 8.2, rounded up to 

Lejileigiogexample urs jand Hide armour is by 9. Thus a character wearing a full set would reduce his Initiative by 
default assumed to be made from leather 9 pOil’ltS 

. Linen or its woollen equivalent is considered the default 
Linen x1 . . . . 

material used in flexible armours up to Laminated ANATHAYM’S SAGA 
Anathaym’s Saga

Shell tetonbedthisck, and h t ke . . . 
Cf a_rm;ur_l_en ; s blc a; ZVY. . m; . d Meerish Warrwors wear Hoplite Half Plate armour: helm, greaves, vam- 

up for its fragility, but can be used in Laminated, an . . . 
Shell x2 P N ) i ) braces, breatsplate, and kilt. Anathaym therefore has her seven Hit Locations 

Scaled armour; or if the source creature is of sufficient i . . . 
o I covered with armour having an ENC value of 4 per prece. The total ENC is 

S1Z€, S1ngle P1eces carves own to shape Ior Flate . . . 

therefore 28, and her Initiatwe Penalty due to the Hoplite Armour 28/5. Her 
i Tougher, and lighter than other fabrics, silk can be used e . 

Silk x0.75 Initiative Penally s therefore -6. 
to make flexible armours 

Superior in strength to iron or bronze, it is can be 

Steel x0.75 fashioned into thinner, lighter pieces for rigid material 

armours 

ACcCcOoMmMmOoDdAaTtIioONn 
ot often used due to its weight, stones such as jade or . 
bad b L and s 4 I J, Accommodation can be permanent or temporary, fixed or trans- 

obsidian can be carved, an round Into smaj 1€CCS . . 
Stone x3 N P portable. Prices for rented temporary accommodation, such as a 

suitable for laminated or scaled armours, or large single . . . 
room at an inn, are per night. Food is extra. 

segments worn as impromptu half-plate cuirasses . R i 
As always, accommodation costs will vary with seasons and 

demand. In busy periods — markets, festivals, and so on — prices will 
climb with demand, and larger towns and cities will charge more, in 
general, than smaller ones. 

58



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 

ACcCcOoMmMmOoDdAaTtIioONn TAaBbLlEe CLloOTtHhIinNgG TAaBbLlEe 

Accommodation Garment Cheap Reasonable Superior 
Cheap Reasonable Superior 

Type Boots 25 50 100 

Common room floor/ Cap or Hat 3 6 18 
0.5 - - 

stables 
Gloves, Socks or 5 10 20 

Shared room/ Underwear 

dormitory 
General Coat or Cloak 20 45 90 

Private room 
Vest or Tabard 10 20 50 

Rented hovel or shack 
Tunic or Dress 15 30 78 

(week) 
Sandals 4 8 20 

Rented cabin or 
Shoes 20 45 90 

cottage (week) — sleeps 15 25 50 
Trousers, Skirt or Kilt 12 25 60 

small family 
Shirt, Smock or Shift 8 16 35 

Rented house or 

apartment (week) — 30 50 75 Winter Coat or Cloak 30 75 150 

sleeps large family 

Rented villa or 

mansion(week) — sleeps 100 250 1000 

small entourage 

Hovel or shack to buy 100 - - 

Cabin or Cottage to 
750 1,250 2,500 

buy (per bedroom) FooDd 
House or Apartment Food is not specified by any particular type in MYTHRAS as it can 

to buy (per 2 3,000 5,000 7,500 vary dramatically according to culture: assume that food bought is 

bedrooms) a meal which, for a very basic, cheap meal typically includes some 
kind of broth, pastry or bread, and some brewed or dairy bever- 

Villa or Mansion 

to buy 20,000 50,000 200,000 age. More expensive meals include larger portions of meat or fish, 

(per 4 bedrooms) a wider range of seasonal fruits and vegetables, and a better grade 

Tent (per person of beverage. A superior meal consists of several varied courses, and 

capacity) luxuries of some sort such as rare meats, spices or imported fruits. 
Trail rations consist of food preserved for long life, such as dried 

and cured meats, cheese, bread (usually unleavened flatbread for 
case of transport), and cereals, either nuts or grains. 

Characters need to eat and drink at least once per day or begin 
to suffer penalties, see Survival on page 49. 

CLloOTtHhIinNgG 
All characters begin the game with a set of clothes appropri- 

ate to their culture and social class, but through wear and tear it Foopd TAaBbLlEe 
will become necessary to replace existing garments as well as buy Type Cheap Reasonable Superior 

new ones appropriate to the local conditions or to celebrate unusual Meal at a tavern or inn 1 3 8 

occasions. Those of high Social Class may even be required to con- Ale or Beer for an evening 1 1.3 3] 

tinually purchase new sets of clothes simply to keep up with fashion. 
Wine or Spirits for an 2 4 6 

The following prices are merely guidelines. There is technically 
evening 

no upper limit as to how much an item of garb can cost once you 
Trail rations (7 days) 7 9 12 

take into consideration exotic fabrics, embroidery, dyed colours, and 
decorations of precious furs or jewels. 

Assuming more or less continual wear, cheap clothing can be 
worn for a year before it is rendered to rags. Reasonable clothing 
lasts for twice that before being reduced to cheap status. Superior 
clothing lasts for three years of wear, and then is downgraded to 

LIivVeEsStToOcCkK 
reasonable status. 

In many communities livestock represents cash wealth, and may 
Repairing clothing is a normal part of everyday life. In most cul- 

even form the local currency. Livestock needs to be fed and ten- 
tures it is commonplace to provide garments, footwear or the fabric 

dered. The cost to maintain livestock in bought food (grazing will 
to make such things as part of an employee’s annual wages. 

usually be free during appropriate seasons, but stockpiled food is 
essential in inclement seasons) for a week is usually a twentieth of 
the animal’s price. 
A creature’s inherent worth is not simply dependent on how 

much food it produces when butchered. Some are valued for their 

59

o 

(& 

fanl 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt 

ability to draw vehicles or ploughs, whilst others may be a source Tools ENC Cost 
of valuable materials such as ivory or chitin. A few creatures might 

Abacus 8 SP 
even be kept for their ability to fight or hunt. 

Astrolabe (Ancient onwards) 200 SP 
The following table only offers general livestock. In more exotic 

Backpack/Satchel (holds up to 20 ENC) 5SP 
settings one can expect to see a greater range of creatures available, 
anything from giant insects to flying beasts. Higher quality usually Bedroll 1 SP 

reflects better physical characteristics or training, but can be merely Bit & Bridle 15 SP 

based upon the creature’s aesthetic beauty. Block & tackle 15 SP 

Bottle, glass/ earthenware 2 SP 
Livveessttoock TAaBbLlEe 

Candle, 6 hour 1 SP 

Item Poor Quality  Reasonable Superior 
Chain, 2m 40 SP 

Bull 500 1000 3000 
Chest, Large (holds up to 100 ENC) 80 SP 

Calf 30 60 180 
Chest, Small (holds up to 50 ENC) 40 SP 

Camel 1100 2200 6000 
Cooking Pot (for travel) 3 SP 

Cow 100 200 600 
Craft tools (basic tools to match a handicraft) 75 SP 

Towl 1 2 4 
Crop (riding) 15 SP 

Goat 25 50 100 
Crowbar 25 SP 

Horse (cavalry/ 3000 6000 10,000 Doorjamb 5SP 
war-trained) 

Driver’s whip 25 SP 
Horse (heavy draught) 1400 2800 8000 

Talconer’s Kit 30 SP 
Horse (riding) 1200 2500 7000 

Feed/mount rations (per day) 5CP 
Ox 150 300 800 

Tine wine goblet (glass — double for silver) 8 SP 
Pig 25 50 150 

Tirst aid kit (useful for 10 applications of First Aid 
Sheep 25 50 150 25 SP 

skill) 

Fish hooks (20) 1 SP 

Tishing kit 15 SP 

Tishing Net 10 SP 

Flint & tinder 1 SP 

Tooouils Game Snares, and Traps 1 SP 

Tools include all the items any self-respecting adventurer can be Goad 25 SP 
expected to own: rope, sacks and bags, candles, lanterns, and so on. 

Grappling hook 58P 
All items in this list are deemed to be of reasonable quality. 

Hammer/Saw/Mallet/ Chisel 1 SP 

Healer’s kit (useful for 10 applications of Healing 
150 SP 

skall) 

Hourglass (Ancient onwards) 20 SP 

Knife (tool, not weapon) 58P 

Ladder, rope 3m 2 SP 

Lantern, basic 1 10 SP 

Lock picks 75 SP 

1-4 

Lockbox depending 75 - 250 SP 

on size 

Lodestone 58P 

Milling Stone 2 8 SP 

Mirror (hand glass) 12 SP 

Mug/Beaker/Dish/Plate (wood — double price for 
5 CP each 

metal) 

Musical instrument 70 SP 

Nails or tacks (50) 2 CP 

Oil flask 1 SP 

Papyrus or paper sheet (double the cost for vellum) 5CP 

[ RSN& o 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcCoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 

Tools ENC Cost with their own weapon. The Reach categories are Touch (T), Short (S), 
Medium (M), Long (L), and Very Long (VL). 

Oil flask 1 1 SP 
& Combat Effects: The design of the weapon allows it access lo weapon 

Papyrus or paper sheet (double the cost for vellum) — 5CP 
specific Special Effects. Swords, for instance, slce and stab, and so are 

Pickaxe 1 35 SP 
permitted access to the Impale and Bleed effects, whereas a mace us unable 

Pole, 3m 1 1 SP lo produce those effects but could inflict Stun Location instead (see Special 
Quills , and ink for writing 1 30 SP LEffects page 95). 
Quiver — 2 SP « ENC: The weapon’s combined encumbrance and weight 
Razor, folding — 3 Sp « AP/HPA:ll weapons are ratedf or thewr Armour Points and Hut Points; 
Rope (hemp), 10m 2 10 SP their ability to withstand direct damage, and how much damage they 

Sack, large (holds up to 60 ENC) 1 5CP can lolerate before breaking. Those weapons that rely on metal for ther 
damage capability are assumed to be either bronze or iron. 

Sack, small (holds up to 30 ENC) — 2CP 
Trauts: Some weapons, due to their specialised nature, have certain qual- 

Saddle, riding 3 60 SP 
wtes, or traits, that differentiate them from weapons of a sumilar style. 

Saddle, war 4 90 SP 
The common traits are: 

Saddlebag (holds up to 2x20 ENC) 2 20 SP & Barbed — If impaled it will cause_full vather than half damage on 
Saw, hand 1 1 SP being yankedf ree. 
Scythe/ Sickle 2 30 SP &K Defensive — If used to parry an attacking weapon, that weapon is 
Sextant (Renaissance cultures, and later) 1 25 SP considered one size smaller than it actually 5. So a Large sword 

Ship’s Compass (Medieval cultures, and later) 1 70 SP 15 considered Medium, and a Medium sword is considered Small. 

Shoes, horse 1 10 SP Weapons already Small in size are unaffected. 
K Double Ended — If broken in combal, the length remaining in the 

Spade/Hoe/Pitchfork 1 25 SP 
hand can be reversed, and used as a shorter version of the orginal 

Torch, 1 hour — 4 CP 
weapon. 

Torch, 6 hour 1 8 CP 
&K Entrapping — As per the Defensive trait, but also allows use of the 

Waterskin or Canteen (holds 2 litres of liquid) 1 5CP 
Pin Weapon special effect without needing to roll a Critical. 

Wax, block 1 2 CP &K Flexible — If the opponent is using a shield to parr, the shield is 
considered one size smaller than it actually is. So a Huge shield s 

considered Large, a Large shueld 1s considered Medium, and so on. 
& Mount— The weapon must be usedf rom the back of @ moving mount. 
&K Offensive — The weapon cannot be used to parry. 
& Pussive Block — The weapon can passively block multiple Hit Loca- 

tions, which must be contiguous lo one another. 
& Ranged Parry — The weapon can parry ranged weapons. 

MEeLlEeEe WEeAaPpOoNnSs K Set — The weapon can be set io receive a_foot or mounted chage. 

The weapons listed here cover a wide gamut of societies and &K Stealth — The weapon must be usedfrom ambush. 
periods. Some weapons, such as swords, axes, and spears, are ubiq- &K Thiown — The weapon can be used as a ranged weapon as well as 

uitous, whereas others have firm cultural and period groundings. In a hand-to-hand weapon. 

many societies it is deemed both necessary and desirable to carry 
some means of defending oneself. Customs always vary though, and & Cost: The weapon’s cost in Silver Pieces. 

the type of weapon carried depends very much on circumstances. 
The melee weapon tables begin on page 63. 

Having a sword and dagger anchored to one’s belt may not be 
thought unusual, for instance, whereas carrying a halberd or greats- 
word would be deemed unthinkable unless one is actively preparing 
for war. RAaNnGgEedD WEeAaPpOoNnSs 

All weapons are governed by a series of characteristics which are Ranged weapons deal damage at a distance, and do not require 
as follows: physical contact between combatants; such as a thrown rock, a bullet 

from sling or an arrow from a bow. Being able to harm an oppo- 
&K Damage: The amount of damage the weapon delivers if an attack is 

nent from range has clear advantages: one can take advantage of 
successful. 

cover and greater protection and, unless the opponent has a ranged 
&K Size: Fvery weapon is ratedf or its mass, leverage and stability. The Size 

weapon himself] the chances of you being injured are lessened. 
us used lo determine the weapon’s ability to inflict and parry damage (see 

Since dealing damage at range inevitably means imparting veloc- 
page 94). The size categories are Small (S), Medium (M), Large (L), 

ity to some form of projectile, ranged weapons are difficult to defend 
Huge (H), and Enormous (E). 

against. Without a shield or other form of solid cover that can 
& Reach: Every weapon is also ratedf or ils Reach — ils length and ability 

disperse the energy of a projectile, ranged weapons cannot be par- 
lo hold a foe at bay due to its length. The longer the weapon the greater 

ried; meaning that the best defence, if one is aware of an incoming 
its ability to prevent an opponent getting close enough to inflict damage 

missile, is evasion. However evasion often puts the defendant into a 
situation where returning an attack, even a ranged one, is difficult. 

61



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcCoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt 

Ranged weapons have very similar characteristics to Melee arrows, as long as the appropriate raw materials, and a suitable work 
Weapons, although there are some differences as noted below: area or workshop are available for the task. If bought from a crafts- 

man then the costs are as follows: 
&K Damage: The amount of damage the weapon delivers if an attack is 

successful. & Arrows (per sheaf of a dozen) 4 SP 
& Damage Modifier: Not all ranged weapons can take advantage of a char- & Quarrels (per sheaf of a dozen) 3 SP 

acter’s damage modifier. A Ves or No entry dictates whether or not the & Lead sling bullets (per bag of twenty) 1 SP 
user’s damage modifier can be applied. & Blowgun darts (per half dozen) 2 SP 

& Force: Each ranged weapon possesses a_force rating equivalent to the & Thrown darts (per sheaf of a dozen) 2 SP 
Size’ of close combat weapons. In the case of projectiles, this does not 

Ranged Weapon tables begin on page 65. 
relate to the firing weapon self; but rather to how much impact’ s 
ammunition has. The value is used to determine whether the weapon can 
overcome any shield which may parry it. The size categories are Small 
(S), Medium (M), Large (L), Huge (H), and Enormous (E). SIieEgGEe WEeAaPpOoNnSs 

&K Range: This is a measwre of the weapon’s effictiveness at thiee distances 
Most siege weapons are used to lob simple bolts or stones at tar- 

separated by slashes, representing the maximum Close, Effective and 
gets. They are so powerful that a direct hit will generally cripple 

Long ranges of the weapon or its ammunition. Ranges are expressed in 
or kill most armoured humanoids with a single shot. However, it 

metres. Note that distance penalties to the user’s skill are independentfrom 
is often only siege weapons which can hurt larger creatures such as 

the weapon, see page 108. 
giants or dragons . If not being used in battle most siege weapons 

& Close Range — The distance over which Choose Location may be used 
are used to reduce fortifications, breaching holes in walls or destroy- 

as a non-critical special effect, provided the target is stationary or ing defensive towers hosting their own siege weapons. 
unaware of the impending attack. The following weapons do not use handedness, damage bonuses 

& Effective Range — The distance over which there are no significant or ENC being beyond such issues. The Size of their projectiles is 
modfiers on the weapon’s accuracy or power rated as Beyond Enormous (BE), meaning that no shield will protect 

& Long Range — The distance over which the weapon can stll inflict against the force of such impacts. Due to the nature of the weapons, 
harm, but the amount of damage is halved, and its Force is reduced 

Range only has two values; Effective Range and Long Range. 
by one step. 

&K Load: This shows how many turns are required to load or reload a NOoTtEeSs oONn SIieEgGEe WEeAaPpOoNnSs 
weapon which fires ammunition. 

& Combat EffectsA:s per Close Combal weapons. & Reloading time is measured in Combat Rounds, not Turns. 

&K Impaling Size: The effective size of the weapon or its ammunition if it & Crew: This is the minimum and maximum crew required to 

succeeds in an impaling attack. operate the weapon. Each extra person above the minimum 

& ENC: The weapon’s combined encumbrance and weight. value reduces the Load time by 1. 

& AP/HPA:ll weapons are ratedf or their Armour Points and Hit Points; & Siege Weapon Combat Effects are included for attacks 

their ability to withstand direct damage, and how much damage they against large or colossal creatures. They are superfluous 

can tolerate before breaking Those weapons that rely on metal for their against fortifications. 

damage capability are assumed to be either bronze or iron. 
Siege Weapon tables begin on page 64. 

&K Cost: The weapon’s cost in Silver Pieces. 

1! Thrown javeellins maay use the Pin Weeapon special effeect agaiinsst shiielldss,, wiithout 
needing to rooll laa Crriittiicaall.. 

VEeHhIiCcLlEeSs 
RAaNnGgEeDd WEeAaPpOoNn AMmMmUuNInTitIioONn Most vehicles are drawn by one or more animals, and move at 

Weapons such as bows and crossbows use ammunition to deliver the animal’s rate. The number of animals required, for the animals 
damage. Arrows, quarrels, darts and bullets can be made by any- to maintain their standard movement rate, is noted in the Draw col- 
one with the appropriate craft skill, for example Craft (Fletcher) for umn of the vehicles table. Reduce the movement proportionately 

if fewer animals are used. Generally drivers will not exceed the 
required number of animals because this decreases control, stability, 
and integrity. 

The amount a vehicle can carry in terms of driver(s), and passen- 
gers, and cargo (total ENC) is indicated in the Load column. Again, 
drivers will refuse to exceed these load amounts because control, and 
stability becomes more difficult. 

Vehicle tables begin on page 64. 

62



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 

ONnEe HAaNnDdEeDd WEeAaPpOoNnSs 
Weapon Damage Size Reach  Combat Effects ENC AP/HP Traits Milieu Cost 

Bash, Entangle, Stun 
Ball & chain 1d6+1 M M . 2 6/8 Flexible M 250 SP 

Location 

Battleaxe 1d6+1 M M Bleed, Sunder 1 4/8 A-R 100 SP 

Broadsword 1d8 M M Bleed, Impale 2 6/10 A-E 175 SP 

Chain 1d4 M M Entangle 1 8/6 Flexible A-T 10 SP 

Club 1d6 M S Bash, Stun Location 1 4/4 All 5SP 

Dagger 1d4+1 S S Bleed, Impale . 6/8 Thrown All 30 SP 

Hatchet 1d6 S S Bleed 1 4/6 Thrown All 25 SP 

Falchion 1d6+2 M M Bleed 1 6/10 A-M 200 SP 

Flail 1d6 M M Bash 1 3/6 Flexible A-M 25 SP 

Knife 1d3 S S Bleed, Impale . 5/4 All 10 SP 

Lance 1d10+2 H VL Impale, Sunder 3 4/10 Mount A-M 150 SP 

Longsword 1d8 M L Bleed, Impale 2 6/12 M-R 250 SP 

Mace 1d8 M S Bash, Stun Location 1 6/6 A-R 100 SP 

Main Gauche 1d4 S S Bleed e 6/10 Entrapping M-E 180 SP 

Military pick 1d6+1 M M Stun Location, Sunder 3 6/10 M-E 180 SP 

Entrapping, 
Net 1d4 S L Entangle 3 2/20 All 20 SP 

Thrown 

Rapier 1d8 M L Impale 1 5/8 E 100 SP 

Sabre 1d6+1 M M Bleed, Impale 1 6/8 E-1 225 SP 

Scimitar 1d8 M M Bleed 2 6/10 M-E 200 SP 

Shortspear 1d8+1 M L Impale 2 4/5 Set, Thrown All 20 SP 

Shortsword 1d6 M S Bleed, Impale 1 6/8 All 100 SP 

Trident 1d8 M L Impale 2 4/10 Barbed, Thrown A-M 155 SP 

Entrapping, 

Whip 1d3 M VL Entangle, Stun Location 1 2/8 Flexible, A-M 100 SP 

Offensive 

Shields

Shield Damage Size Reach  Combat Effects ENC AP/HP Traits Milieu Cost 

. Ranged Parry; Passive 50 SP 
Buckler 1d3 M S Bash, Stun Location 1 6/9 i M-E 

Blocks 2 locations 

. Ranged Parry; Passive 150 SP 
Heater 1d4 L S Bash, Stun Location 2 6/12 i M 

Blocks 3 locations 

. . Ranged Parry; Passive 300 SP 
Hoplite 1d4 H S Bash, Stun Location 3 6/15 i A-M 

Blocks 4 locations 

. . Ranged Parry; Passive 300 SP 
Kite 1d4 H S Bash, Stun Location 3 4/15 i M 

Blocks 4 locations 

. Ranged Parry; Passive 150 SP 
Peltast 1d4 L S Bash, Stun Location 2 4/12 i A-M 

Blocks 3 locations 

. Ranged Parry; Passive 450 SP 
Scutum 1d4 H S Bash, Stun Location 4 4/18 i A-M 

Blocks 5 locations 

Ranged Parry; Passive 150 SP 
Target 1d3+1 L S Bash, Impale 2 4/9 i A-E 

Blocks 3 locations 

. . Ranged Parry; Passive 300 SP 
Viking 1d4 L S Bash, Stun Location 3 4/12 M 

Blocks 4 locations 

63



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt 

Two HAaNnDdEeDd WEeAaPpOoNnSs 
Weapon Damage Size Reach Combat Effects ENC AP/HP Traits Milieu Cost 

Battleaxe 1d8+1 L M Bleed, Sunder 1 4/8 A-M 100 SP 

Garrotte 1d2 S - e 1/2 Stealth A-1 15 SP 

Glaive/ Rhomphaia 1d10+2 L L Bleed, Sunder 2 4/10 A-M 250 SP 

Great axe 2d6+2 H IL, Bleed, Sunder 2 4/10 A-M 125 SP 

Great club 2d6 H L Bash, Stun Location 3 4/10 All 50 SP 

Great hammer 1d10+3 H L R 3 4/10 M-E 250SP 
Sunder 

Greatsword 2d8 H L Bleed, Impale, Sunder 4 6/12 M-E 300 SP 

Halberd/Polcaxe 1d8+2 L vy el 4 4/10 Set AE 200 SP 
Impale, Sunder 

Longspear 1d10+1 L VL Impale 2 4/10 Set All 30 SP 

Longsword 1d10 L L Bleed, Impale, Sunder 2 6/12 M-E 250 SP 

Military flail 1d10 L L Bash, Stun Location 3 4/10 Flexible A-M 250 SP 

Pike/Sarissa 1d10+2 L VL Impale 4 4/12 Set A-M 90 SP 

Quarterstaff’ 1d8 M L Stun Location 2 4/8 Defensive All 20 SP 

Xyston 1d10 L VL Impale 3 4/10 Sct; Double A 100 SP 
Ended 

SIieEgGEe WEeAaPpOoNnSs 
Weapon Damage Rflnge Load  Crew SIZ Combat Effects AP/HP Milieu Cost 

Effective Long 

Scorpion 3d6 150m 300m 4 1/1 BE Impale, Sunder 4/15 A-M 750 SP 

Ballista 4d6 200m 400m 5 2/4 BE Impale, Sunder 4/25 A-M 1,000 SP 

Mangonel 5d6 250m 500m 6 2/4 BE Bash, Stun 4/50 M 1,250 SP 

Onager 6d6 300m 600m 7 3/6 BE Bash, Stun 4/75 A-M 1,500 SP 

Couillard 7d6 350m 700m 8 3/6 BE Bash, Stun 4/100 M 3,000 SP 

Trebuchet 8d6 400m 800m 9 4/8 BE Bash, Stun 4/150 M 5,000 SP 

VEeHhIiCcLlEeSs 
Vehicle Occupants/Load ENC Draw Milieu Cost 

Two wheeled cart (hayrick, ox cart or similar) 6/60 1 A-1 60 

Two wheeled wagon (goods cart, carriage or similar) 10/100 1 A1 175 

Four Wheeled Freight wagon 10/200 2 A-1 500 

War Chariot 2/20 2 AT 1200 

Sedan Chair (carried by humans) 1/10 2 A-1 400 

Palanquin (carried by humans) 4/40 8 Al 2000 

Stage Coach (covered and comfortable) 8/200 4 R, I 8000 

Heavy Coach (covered and comfortable) 12/400 8 R, I 15000 

64



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 

RAaNnGgEeDd WEeAaPpOoNnSs 
I;/‘:;ii[i Damage l])[;:; Force  Range Load C;fir:izt In;f::le ENC  AP/IHP  Milieu Cost 

Atlat] — — +1 Step +0/+25/+75 1 — — 1 1/4 P 10 SP 

Blowgun e N — 10/20/30 2 — — . 1/4 P 30 SP 

Bolas 1d4 N — 10/25/50 — Entangle — — 2/2 P-A 10 SP 

Dagger 1d4 Y S 5/10/20 . Impale S . 6/8 All 30 SP 

Dart 1d4 Y S 5/10/20 — Impale S — 2/1 P-A 10 SP 

Discus 1d4+1 Y L 5/20/40 e Stun Location — . 2/3 A 30 SP 

Hatchet 1d6 Y S 10/20/30 — Bleed — 1 4/6 All 25 SP 

Wiy uosihmy 1d10 N H 20/150/300 4 Impale, S 2 4/8 ME 350 SP 
Sunder 

Impale, Pin 

Javelin 1d8+1 Y H 10/20/50 — Weapon M 1 3/8 A-M 20 SP 

(Shield) 

Light crossbow 1d8 N L 20/100/200 3 Impale S 1 4/5 M-E 150 SP 

Long bow 1d8 Y H 15/125/250 2 Impale S 1 4/7 M 200 SP 

Net . N . 3/5/10 . Entangle — 3] 2/20 All 20 SP 

Recurve bow 1d8 Y H 15/125/250 2 Impale S 1 4/8 A-M 225 SP 

Short bow 1d6 Y L 15/100/200 2 Impale S 1 4/4 P-M 75 SP 

Shortspear 1d8 Y L 10/15/30 - Impale M 1 4/5 All 20 SP 

Sling 1d8 N L 10/150/300 3 Stun Location — . 1/2 P-M 5SP 

Staff sling 2d6 N E 5/25/50 4 Stun Location — 2 3/6 A-M 20 SP 

Stone/Rock 1d3 Y S 5/10/20 . Stun Location — All 

Trident 148 Y L 10/15/30 — Barbed, M 2 4/10 AM  155SP 
Impale 

E might be reduced by several grades. Some repairing, and manufac- 
EqQUu i] pPmMEeNnTt turing tasks will be simply impossible without the right elements, and 

Games Masters will need to adjudicate based on local circumstances 
MAaNn uU fFaAcCtTuU rR]i nN gG (does a village have a working forge? Is iron, and wood available?), 

AND UALITY and on common sense. 
and Quality

With the right resources characters can make, repair, and CI RCUMSTANCE M ODIFIERS 
Circumstance Modifiers

enhance the quality of items they acquire. The right resources are 
The following modifiers may be applied, depending on 

the skills to do the job (usually a Craft skill, or Engineering/Mecha- 
circumstances: 

nisms); tools, and other equipment, such as a forge, workbench, and 
so on; and, finally, time. 

? ’ ¥ tm REeSsoOUuRrCcEe MOoDIdFifIiEeRrSs TAaBbLlEe 

Circumstances Skill Grade 
REeSsoOUuRrCcEeSs 

No tools Hopeless 
Access to resources is essential to the task. These will differ from . 

Improvised tools Herculean 
one job to another but will, at the very least, involve suitable tools, Poor Quality/1 . ) 

. . oor Qualll ncomplete tools, or . 
materials, and a suitable place of work (a forge or workshop for ) ty P Formidable 

lacking crucial resources 
example). 

The availability of resources determines a number of things: 
TaAsk ROoUuNnDdSs 

& Whether or not the task is possible Building or repairing something is measured by Task Rounds. 
& How long it takes to complete This is a variable amount of time dependent on what is being done. 
& The quality of the output Again, Games Masters should decide how long something is going 
It is the Games Master’s responsibility to decide if available to take, but the suggested Task Round table below offers some sug- 

resources are suitable, and in the right quantities. If they are not gestions, and inspiration: 

then the grade of the skill being used for the task should be reduced 
appropriately— and if there is a true dearth of materials, the skill 

65



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcCoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt 

/.\ 

. 

SaAmMPpLlEe TAaskK ROoUuNnDdSs 100%. For example, if a blacksmith is ordered to shape, and fit a 

Task Appropriate Skill Task Round Unit horseshoe in two Task Rounds (half the usual time needed) then, 
unless he scores two critical successes with his skill rolls the finished 

Repairing clothing Craft (Needlework) 5 minutes — 1 hour 
shoes will have no more than 50% of their effectiveness (meaning 

i 5 minutes — 30 
Torging metal Craft (Blacksmith) they are incorrectly shaped, do not fit properly, and may come loose 

minutes 
or even injure the horse). 

Torging a sword Craft (Weaponsmith) 1 days — 5 days 
With unlimited time it is possible to exceed 100%. The percent- 

Erecting a wooden or 6 months — several 
Engineering age achieved at the end of the time available indicates the overall 

stone structure years 
quality of the product or task, as shown in the Item Quality table, 

Mechanisms or Craft 
Sharpening a blade 3 to 5 minutes opposite. Exceptional quality offers enhancements to the product. 

(Weaponsmith) The final percentage reflects the quality of the product or completed 
task. 

Completing the task requires a roll against the relevant skill. Note 
the level of success: 

EnNHhAaNnCcEeMmEeNnTtSs 
« Critical: 50% If a task exceeds 100% in four or fewer Task Rounds it gains 
& Success: 25% Enhancements as indicated in the Item Quality table. If a project 
& Failure : 0% reaches 100% in four or fewer Task Rounds, the maker has the 
& Fumble: —25% option to continue refining it. To do this he continues to work on it 

for a further Task Round and, depending on the result of the skill 
Continue making skill rolls, each taking one Task Round, until 

roll for the Task Round, may enhance it. 
100% has been achieved — or until time, resources, and budget are 
exhausted. Thus, a competent worker will usually be able to accom- & Critical Success: 2 Enhancements 
plish the work in four Task Rounds, assuming a standard Success in & Success: 1 Enhancement 
each round. Reaching 100% means the final result is of an accept- & Failure: No Enhancements 
able standard. Anything less is below par, and may be flawed in & Fumble: Reduce Quality by 25% 
some way. If time is pressing or constrained then the number of 
Task Rounds can be reduced: this will constrain the ability to reach 

66



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 

Thus, a fumble actively overworks the item, taking away from its 
quality rather than enhancing it. 

The Enhancement is determined by the nature of the object. 
Choose from the following: 

Enhancements can be stacked: so an item with two Enhance- 
ments could benefit from being highly efficient, for example, con- 
ferring a 10% bonus to the using skill. However no item can benefit 
from more than two Enhancements of the same type. 

ItTeEmM QUuAaLlIiTtYy TAaBbLlEe 

Total 
Result Enhancements 

Score 

150 Excellent 2 

125 Good 1 

100 Acceptable 0 

The product will break or wear out 25% faster 

than normal; or its Hit Points and value are 
75 Flawed N 

reduced by one quarter reflecting its flawed 

durability. 

The product will break or wear out 50% faster 

50 Poor than normal; or its Hit Points and value are 

reduced by half reflecting its flawed durability. 

The product will break or wear out 75% faster 

than normal; or its Hit Points and value are 
25 Shoddy e 

reduced by three quarters reflecting its shoddy 

durability. 

0 orless Unusable The product is simply of no use whatsoever. 

EnNHhAaNnCcEeMmEeNnTtSs TAaBbLlEe 

Enhancement Effect 

Desirable The item’s value is doubled. 

Durable The item’s Hit Points are increased by one. 

Resilient The item’s Armour Points are increased by one. 

Efficient The item of such quality that it confers a 5% bonus to the 

skill required to use it. 

Effective If a weapon it gains +1 to its Damage rating. Other items 

reduce ENC value by 1d2 points. 

UssIinNgG TthHEe TAaSskK RUuLlEeSs iInN 

OTtHhEeRr CIirRcCuUMmSsTtAaNnCcEeSs 
The rules presentedfor making and repairing equipment can be applied 

lo many different situations. Using the same basic mechanics any situation 
requiring an wnwestment of time, effort and skill, and requiring a quality of 
outcome, can be simulated. Some examples are given below: 

Social conflict - where characters are engaged in argument, debate, negoti- 
ation, politics, diplomacy, and so on. 

Affawrs of the heart— seductions, courtshap, proof of love (or even hatred). 
Steges and wars of attrition — use the Task rules to simulate the progress 

of a stege or extended battle over a long-term period. 
Chases and pursuits — use the Task rules where purswits take place over 

days or weeks, rather than in detailed time where an tmmediate result is more 
destrable. 

Games Masters will no doubtf ind their own uses for these rules. 

67



