Mythras:  Creatures

oy X 2 o % o F WKW I K A << A o B B T <= B = Gl 

Creatures

oy X 2 o % o F WKW M K K B A M YU < <G | 

nimals, monsters, and creatures of myth, legend and folk- fixed INT of 6, and an INS of 2d6+6, giving an INS range of 8 to 
lore are the focus of this chapter. The primary use of crea- 18 with an average of 13. Its INT though, as measured in sapient 

A tures is as adversaries, but they should never be thought terms, is only 6. 
of strictly in these terms. Every creature has its own motivations, INS, then, represents instinctive behaviour but also innate cun- 
instincts and drives, just as characters do, and they can be much ning, and other behaviours essential to its nature and survival that 
more than simply sword or arrow fodder. Intelligent, sapient crea- would otherwise be penalized or poorly represented by a straight 
tures in particular may act with similar degrees of intelligence, guile INT score. 
and cunning as any character and, with the right approach, can be When calculating a creature’s Initiative Bonus they use their INS 
developed into characters in their own right — to interact with as instead of INT. 
well as to be treated as opponents or obstacles. This chapter there- 
fore offers guidance for Games Masters on how to make creatures, CRrEeAaTtUuRrEe INNT TAaBbLlEe 

sapient and otherwise, as effective as possible, be this the tactics of 
fi:;;e Creature Types 

pack hunters or how to represent creatures operating on instinct or 
other motivations. 1 Invertebrates (worms, snails, and such) 

Most creatures in MYTHRAS are defined by the same characteris- 2 Insects and Crustaceans 
tics, attributes and skills as player characters. This means that some 3 Amphibians and Fish 
species, sapient or otherwise, can be used as player characters if 

a Reptilian, Avian, and Mammalian herbivores (such as elk or 
Games Masters allow this in their campaign. There are, however, 

triceratops) 
certain differences that help mark creatures and different species, 

Reptilian and Avian carnivores (for example allosaurs or terror 
from standard humans, notably Intelligence and Instinct, and Crea- 

> birds) 
ture Abilities. 

6 Mammalian carnivores (bears, big cats, and the like) 

7 Almost sapient Mammals and Monsters (apes, chimera etc) 

InNtTeElLlLiIgGeEnNcCEe 

AanNDd InNsStTiInNcCtT CRrEeAaTtUuRrEe ABbILilIiTtIiEeSs 
Some creatures do not exhibit intelligence on the same scale or A creature ability is something it can do naturally as a result of its 

in the same way as humans. It is usual, for instance, to judge dogs physiology, biology, innate magic, and so forth. Birds, for example, 

and cats (and most mammals) as being less intelligent than humans can flap through the air, and so Flying is an ability. 

because they appear to have limited reasoning and problem-solving Each of the following abilities is described in terms of its game 

capabilities, and are driven far more by base instinct than a rea- effects, and how it may affect interactions with others: 

soned approach to their environment. Where such creatures are 
ADdHhEeRrIinNgG 

concerned, INT is a fixed value determined by the creature’s gen- 
The creature can move freely on vertical surfaces, and even move 

eral type (see the Creature INT table below), and a new charac- 
upside down on a ceiling with no special equipment. Such Move- 

teristic, Instinct (INS), is used to figure all attributes and skills that 
ment is always at half the creature’s normal Movement rate. 

would otherwise rely on the INT score. Creatures calculate INS on 
2d6+fixed INT. Thus a wolf, being a mammalian carnivore, has a 

214



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

ALlLlEerRgGYy CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIicC DRrAaIinN 

The creature has a powerful allergy or other negative reaction The creature has the innate ability to drain temporary Charac- 
to a specific substance that normally does not inflict damage; such teristic points from the target of their attacks. The type of attack, 
as wine, salt, water, and so on. If the creature is exposed to the sub- the Characteristic affected, and how to resist the draining effect is 
stance it suffers 1d6 damage per Combat Round to those locations in detailed in the creature’s description. 
contact. Worn armour blocks its normal amount of Armour Points 
against this damage, assuming the creature is not fully drenched or CoLlpd-BLloOoODdEedD 
immersed in the substance. Natural protection, however, does not The creature does not need to eat frequently. One meal a week 

count. is sufficient to keep it healthy and well fed, and gorging itself on a 
large amount of meat will remove the need to eat for a month. Con- 

AQqUuAaTtIiCc versely, when exposed to temperatures below 15 degrees Celsius, its 
The creature breathes water rather than air, generally possessing reflexes become muted, suffering a penalty of -6 to Initiative, and 

gills or a skin capable of absorbing dissolved air directly. If taken out the loss of one Combat Action per round. Below 5 degrees Celsius 
of water and their breathing organs allowed to dry out, they begin cold blooded creatures become completely torpid, entering a help- 
to suffocate after their CON in minutes if remaining passive or half less catatonic state. 
that time if moving or fighting. 

CoMmMmUuNnAaLl MIiNnDd 
BLloOoOdD SEenNSsEe Though a single creature of this type has only a low INT] a large 

Allows the creature to detect blood over great distances, either group of them together possess a vastly improved intellect, poten- 
carried by wind or water. Traces of blood can be sensed at a distance tially achieving sapience. 
of half its INS in kilometres. 

DAaRrKk SIigGhHTt 
BRrEeAaTthHEe FlLaAmMEe Allows the creature to see normally in the complete absence of 

The creature breathes flame over an area as a Combat Action. light. 
The flame covers a cone in front of the creature, which stretches 
for its CON in metres. At the furthest extent, the width of the cone DEeAaTthH SEenNSsEe 
is one quarter of the creature’s CON. Any creature caught in the In tune with the powers of death, the creature can sense the 

flame suffers fire-based damage to all hit locations, though a charac- death of living things, and dead flesh at a range of up to half its 

ter can attempt to Evade to halve this damage. Armour Points count INT or INS in kilometres. 

as normal unless otherwise noted. 
DiiseAaSsEe ImMmMUuNnIiTtYy 

A creature can only breathe flame once in a specified time period 
The creature is immune to all diseases. All creatures without SIZ 

(usually once per hour or once per day). Further attempts to breathe 
automatically have this ability, although it is not specifically listed in 

flame within this time require the creature to pass Endurance rolls 
their descriptions. 

with each roll becoming one grade harder, or suffer a level of Fatigue. 

URROWER DiivIinNgG STtRrIikKEe 
Burrower

Some creatures can plummet from the sky or surge through 
The creature is adept at tunnelling through the ground at its 

the waters to attack their prey, striking with incredible force. This 
normal Movement rate. Some creatures are limited in the kind of 

is effectively charging for creatures which are not land based. Div- 
ground they can move through, which is noted in the creature’s 

ing Strike increases both the Size of the attack, and the creature’s 
description. 

Damage Modifier by one step, for this attack only. A diving strike 

CAaMmOoUuFfLlAaGgEeDd may only be used once per round. The creature must be at least 

The creature is adept at hiding due to its colouration or unusual one full round of Movement above its target (or possibly below if 

surface texture. Those attempting to spot the creature suffer a pen- submerged) in order to use the diving strike. 

alty to Perception of two difficulty grades. 
EaARrTthH SEenNSsEe 

CHhAaOoSs AUuRrAa Some creatures are so in tune with the underground world that 

This creature is tainted by Chaos, and other chaotic creatures they can work perfectly well in the total darkness of the deep. By 

can sometimes recognise this. When encountering a creature of sensing vibration and air pressure, a creature with Earth Sense can 

Chaos, it can attempt a Willpower roll. If successful, the creature fight, and make Perception rolls with no penalty as long as their tar- 

will not be attacked by its enemy, so long as it does not take any get is no more than their INS in metres away. If using Earth Sense 

hostile action. above ground the range is halved. 

CHhAaOoSs FeEaAtTuURrEe EchHOoLlOoCcAaTtIioOnN 
Creatures tainted with Chaos do not always obey the normal The creature senses its environment through reflections of sonic 

laws of physical growth, and many are hideously malformed. Each waves. This means that it can perceive others that may be either 

Chaos Feature Trait forces the creature to roll once on the Chaos motionless or hidden. In such circumstances, using a Stealth roll to 

Feature table on pages 275 to 276, applying the effects immediately. attempt to remain unperceived by the creature is two grades more 
difficult. 

215



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

ENnGgUuLlFfIinNgG HoLlpd BRrEeAaTthH 
The creature has an orifice which can swallow targets whole. The The creature can hold its breath for extended periods of time. If 

maximum size of an engulfed victim is figured as half the creature’s prepared and remaining fairly static, the creature can hold its breath 
own SIZ, but may be less than this depending on the creature’s phys- for a number of minutes equal to its CON. This period is halved if 
iology. When engulfed the victim suffers at least one damage roll the creature is active, such as when swimming or fighting. 
based on the creature’s bite attack before being swallowed — the time 
spent chewing depends on the creature, and how sensitive its innards ImMmMUuNnIiTtYy 

are. If still alive a swallowed victim will begin to suffocate, likely The creature is completely immune to damage caused by one 

dying by asphyxiation before suffering any noticeable damage from type of source. This source (cold, fire, iron, etc.) will be noted in the 

stomach acid. Realistically, an engulfed victim lacks the mobility to creature’s listing, but a narrative description may be necessary for 

move inside the digestive tract or the creature is so large that he will some of the more specific immunities. 

die long before he can cut its way out. 
InNtTiImMIidDaATtEe 

FLlyYiInNgG The creature may intimidate opponents as a prelude to combat or 

The creature automatically succeeds in everyday moving and to avoid it altogether: growls, snarls, lowering of horns, and so forth. 

manoeuvring whilst flying, and need not roll their Fly skill unless Opponents must make an unopposed Willpower roll to hold their 

attempting an unusually difficult task, such as flying against a pow- ground; a success allows a character to stand his ground, whereas 

erful wind, evading a ranged attack in the air, or out-manoeuvring a failure indicates that they must spend the next round instinctively 

an aerial foe. A flyer may substitute the Fly skill (base STR+DEX) placing distance between themselves and the creature. If he fumbles 

for Evade whilst fighting whilst aloft. the Willpower roll, then the character flees at maximum speed. A 
critical success allows the character to ignore any further intimida- 

FoORrMmIiDdAaBbLlEe NAaTtUuRrAaLl WEeAaPpOoNnSs tion attempts by the creature or its brethren during that encounter. 
This creature is able to actively parry or deflect attacks using its The effect continues for as long as the creature continues to actin a 

natural weapons. This is due to a combination of fighting style and threatening manner, which includes it making an attack. 
possessing natural armament being formed from resilient substances 
such as horn, chitin or bone which are able to shrug off damage LeEaAPpEerR 
from manufactured weapons. Note that creatures lacking this trait The creature uses Leaping attacks as described on page 104 of 

either rely on their natural armour to turn blows or use Evade. the Combat chapter, but can combine the leap with a physical attack 
such as a claw or bite. If the leaping creature wins the opposed leap 

FrReEnNZzYy attack roll, it automatically inflicts damage for one of its natural 
When wounded or exposed to a particular substance - blood for weapons on the target. This damage cannot be parried except by 

instance - the creature must succeed in a Willpower roll or enter a Passive Blocking. 
frenzy. The frenzy lasts a number of rounds equal to the creature’s 
CON. During the frenzy they must only spend Combat Actions on LifFeE SEenNSsEe 
attacking or moving towards combat. Spellcasting, parrying, evad- In tune with the rhythms of nature, this creature can determine 

ing, and anything else is forbidden; all thoughts of self preservation the vitality of any living creature by touch alone. If the creature 

washed away in a red haze. In return, the creature no longer suffers makes a successful Perception roll, it learns of the target’s current 

pain or fatigue, and is impervious to mental control. During this injuries, Fatigue level, and whether it is currently afflicted by any 

time it is immune to all the detrimental effects of Serious Wounds, poison or disease. The creature is also aware of any form of life 

although a Major Wound will still incapacitate. If still alive, once within a number of metres equal to its Willpower skill, which may 

the frenzy finishes the creature automatically gains a fatigue level make Stealth difficult to accomplish. 

of Exhausted. 
MaaAGgiic SEenNSsEe 

GAaZzEe ATtTtaAcCkK Similar to Life Sense but permits the creature to detect magical 

The creature has a gaze attack. This attack may be active (the emanations over the same distances. If the creature touches another 

creature must consciously spend an Action Point on its turn to use and makes a successful Perception roll, it learns of the target’s cur- 

it on a foe) or passive (anyone looking at the creature is affected), as rent magic points, carried enchantments, and active spells. 

listed in the creature’s description. 
Muurlttii-HHEeaAdDEedD 

GRrAaPpPpLlEerR The creature gains an additional Combat Action per extra head 

If the creature successfully strikes in combat, it can immediately possessed beyond the first. These are lost as each individual head 

Grapple in addition to inflicting damage. If the creature’s attack is incapacitated or severed. Provided one head remains active, the 

was parried (or the creature itself is parrying), then the creature creature can still control its shared body. When a multi-headed crea- 

is granted the Grip effect against the opponent’s limb or the Pin ture resists spells which affect emotions or intellect, it rolls individual 

Weapon effect against his weapon instead. The creature always uses saves for each still intact head. 

its Brawn skill to resist a victim from breaking free. 
Muuttltii-LimmbsedD 

Similar to Multi-headed, the creature gains an additional Com- 
bat Action per extra pair of limbs (beyond the first) it can bring to 
bear during combat — those normally used to hold up or move the 

216



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

creature do not count. These extra Combat Actions can only be control, though it does not have access to any of the memories, skills 
used to perform actions with those specific limbs, and are lost as or magic of the possessed. 
cach pair are immobilised or incapacitated. 

REeGgEeNnEeRrAaTtIioOnN 
NIigGhHTt SiIgGhHTt The creature is able to regenerate Hit Points lost to damage. The 

Allows the creature to treat partial darkness as illuminated and speed of regeneration varies depending upon the creature. Unless 
darkness as partial darkness. specifically noted, regeneration does not replace lost limbs, and the 

severing of a vital location (head, chest or abdomen) will still result 
PoiisoonN ImMmMUuNnIiTtYy in death 

The creature is immune to all poisons. All creatures without SIZ 
automatically have this Trait, although it is not specifically listed in SwWIimMmMEeRr 
their descriptions. The creature automatically succeeds in everyday moving and 

manocuvring whilst swimming, and need not roll their Swim skill 
PossseessssioNn,, COoVvEeRrTt unless attempting an unusually difficult task, such as swimming 
A more insidious means of possession, covert possession means, against a powerful tide or leaping up a waterfall. A swimmer may 

essentially, that the creature’s mind or spirit is a hitchhiker in the substitute the Swim skill for Athletics and Evade rolls whilst in water. 
body of the possessed victim. It exhibits no control over the body 
whist the victim is conscious, leaving the host completely in charge. TEeRrRrIifFyYiInNgG 
In many cases, the possessed host may not even know he is possessed. The creature’s appearance, form or aura is so terrifying it forces 

viewers to make an unopposed Willpower roll. Success indicates the 
PossseessssioNn,, DOoMmIiNnAaNnTt viewer is shaken for one round and cannot act offensively. Failure 

More blatant than its covert cohort, dominant possession occurs causes them to flee in terror. A fumble causes the viewer to collapse 
when the creature’s mind or spirit takes full control of a possessed unconscious from the shock. Only a critical success allows the viewer 
body. The identity (INT, POW and CHA) of the body’s owner is to act unhindered. The viewer need not make any further checks for 
subsumed beneath the identity of the possessing spirit. The pos- the remainder of the combat, even if more of the same creatures 
sessed victim is absolutely helpless, unable to take any are present. Repeated exposure to a specific type of Terrifying 
action at all, unable even to regain Magic monster may eventually permit 
Points, a prisoner in his own body. e the skill check to become 
The possessor is in complete o one or more 

grades 
easier. 



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

TRrAaMmPpLlEe 
The creature is able to trample beings with a SIZ of half or less CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs aASs 

than its own, using its Athletics skill to attack. This inflicts damage 
equal to twice the creature’s base Damage Modifier, and increases CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 
the Size of the attack by one step. How, and when trample is used Any sapient creature (with an INT of 8+) can be used as a player 

depends on the circumstances. If immobile the creature may tram- character if the Games Master is prepared to allow such exotic 

ple a prone opponent on its turn, but this costs an Action Point. If characters in their MYTHRAS campaign. Some species, such as elves, 

the trample is performed whist the creature is moving or charging dwarves, and trolls are, indeed, fantasy staples, and their general 

over an opponent, then the trample is a Free Action. similarities to humans lend themselves readily to play. Others are 
less suited as player characters, usually due to being creatures of 

UNnDdEeAaDd such diverse psychology and physiology that they might not mesh 
Being already dead, the creature is immune to the consequences well with the other characters in the players’ group. A giant amongst 

of both fatigue and severe injuries. Undead are thus immune to all a group of humans or dwarves, for instance, can be an entertaining 
the detrimental effects of Serious Wounds. Even Major Wounds addition but will pose problems in certain conditions. 
do not incapacitate them, although they can still have locations Games Masters must carefully consider whether or not to allow a 
severed or shattered as per normal. Treat the head or chest loca- particular species as a player character, and to weigh-up the poten- 
tion of the undead creature as the area where the spirit or magic tial drawbacks before play begins. However a great deal of fun can 
has been bound. Any location (and those contiguous to it) which is be had from allowing exotic species into a campaign, as long as 
smashed or severed from the bound area ceases to function, but the both players and Games Masters are aware, and accepting of, the 
remainder of the body can continue if it still has limbs with which potential complications that might arise. Players, too, must also take 
to act. A Major Wound to the magic-infused location destroys the into consideration the challenges of playing an exotic creature as a 
undead outright. Only fully corporeal dead creatures may possess character. Playing an Iqari, for example means the character can fly, 
the Undead trait. but has difficulties communicating verbally owing to its physiology. 

This may prove to be a barrier to roleplaying — or it may be a terrific 
VAaMmPpIiRrIiCc opportunity, depending on how the player approaches the role. 

The creature drains its victim’s blood, causing an increase in It must always be remembered that different races and species 
Tatigue levels. The creature must use a bite attack, and cause dam- have different psychologies and drives. Playing an Iqgari in the same 
age with the bite to be able to drain blood at the rate described in way one would run a human character is to do a disservice to that 
the creature’s description. species. 

A final consideration is that there is no concept of balance 
VEenNoOMmOoUuSs between creatures of different races or species. Whilst their cultural 

The creature has a venomous bite, sting or other means of attack. and professional skills may start out at similar levels, their physical or 
The creature’s description provides the game mechanic effects for mental capabilities may be far, far superior. Thus permitting some- 
the particular poison used. A venomous creature may, if desired, one to play an Iqari character in a party of humans might cause 
apply its poison by use of the Inject Venom special effect. resentment amongst the rest of the players, or pose a difficulty for 

the Games Master to provide suitable challenges without placing the 
InNJjeEcCtT VEenNoOmM other characters at risk. 

Whilst the stinger of a scorpion’s tail or the fangs of a cobra are 
extremely threatening, a strike from the natural weapons of a venomous 

CRrEeAaTtuURrEe CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr CRrEeAaTtIioOnN 
creature does not necessarily indicate that venom was injected. Fangs might 

Non-human characters are created in almost exactly the same 
not pass a blocking shueld or stingers fail to penetrate armour. Using the 

way as humans. Characteristics are determined using the character- 
Inject Venom manoeuvre indicales a spectfic desirefor the creature to poison 

istic dice for that species, which will result in different characteristic 
uts_foe. In exchangef orf orfeiting any chance to inflict damage, the creature 

values and ranges, but otherwise all the other elements: attributes, 
Jfinds a weak point in the defence/armous; bypassing it only for the pur- 

culture, profession, and so on, are factored as normal. Of course, 
poses of applying its venom — for example a large venomous snake might 

creatures may have very different cultural bases resulting in different 
attack a warrior wearing chainmarl armour and instead of inflicting dam- 

skills and professions, but nothing stops a Games Master from simply 
age from the bite, ducks past the victim’s parry to merely scratch the back 

adapting the nominally human tables if it is fitting for his setting. 
of the his sword hand, poisoning him. This combat manoeuvre can be used 

Space does not permit individual treatments of culture and 
both offenswely and defensively by venomous creatures. 

career for all possible playable species; however some staple fan- 
- 4 tasy races have been given expanded details for cultural and career 

options. Some of these can be readily applied to species without 
VUuLlNnEeRrAaBbLlEe such detail, or serve as examples or inspiration for developing appro- 

The creature’s natural and magical protection cannot mitigate priate cultural and career packages. For those races that have been 
damage caused by a specific type of source. This source (cold, fire, given greater depth, notes regarding psychology are also provided, 
iron, etc.) will be noted as part of the trait, but a narrative descrip- to assist with roleplaying. 
tion may be included for some specific vulnerabilities. For example, 
silver weapons might pass through the skin of a werewolf. 

218



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

presented are for a typical young adult of the species, and 
NooOnN--HHuUmMAaNn POoIiNnTts BuiiLldD should be increased for older, more experienced individuals. 

Players who wish to play non-human characters may assign charac- & Combat Styles — The Combat Style(s) the creature uses, the 
teristics using the Points Build method (see page 8). The exact same rules percentage, and then the weapons included in the style. 
apply to building non-humans, except that the starting pool of points will & Weapons — The statistics for the creature’s available weapons, 
be based upon the totalled average characteristics of the selected species as listed in the Combat Style. 
or race. & Special Notes — Any game mechanics peculiar to the crea- 

For example an Igari being created using the Points Build method ture: poisons for example, or breath weapon details. 
would start with a rather staggering 108 points (rounded up) for is seven & Player Character Options — Culture, career, and other 
characteristics. However, an Iqari must have a minimum STR of 15, information necessary for playing the creature as a player 
SIZ and DEX of 14, CON and INoTf  8, and a POW and CHA of character. 
3. S0 there are some Limitations on how points can be assigned. 

Games Masters should consider carefully whether to allow players to 
use the Points Buald method when creating creature characters. If the nat- 
ural Characteristics and Attributes of an average member of this species 

Creature Competence
are likely to cause umbrage amongst other players, then a creature which REATURE OMPETENCE 
can be tweaked to garner even more extreme Attribute bonuses will likely Just like humans, creatures — especially sapient ones — display 

different levels of competence in their skills and abilities. Survival of 
disrupt the game. 

the fittest ensures that the most competent prevail, but even so there 
N s will always be differing levels of competence between individuals of 

a species. 

THhEe STtAaTtIiSsTtIicCSs BLloOCckK 
Creature statistics are arranged in a table format called the Statis- How SKkIilLlLeEdD CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

tics Block (or Stat Block for short). The block is arranged as follows: 
SHhooOuUlLdD BEe 

& Creature Name — The creature’s name, and any alternatives. The creatures detailed in this chapter all have skill values listed, 
& Description — A description of the creature’s appearance, and these reflect those for a typical young adult member of the spe- 

demeanour, temperament, and so on, along with any addi- cies. The values are derived by calculating the base for the skill, just 
tional useful notes. as for human characters, and then modifying the base to reflect expe- 

& Characteristics — The characteristic dice for the creature; rience and knowledge (or developed instincts). Generally a creature 
used when creating a bespoke version of the creature. In will have skill base plus between 20 and 40 percentage points, rep- 
parenthesis after each are the average values of the character- resenting its parental training or self learning during adolescence. 
istic dice. This is useful when a quick sample of the creature is There are, however, those individuals that represent either the 
needed. The averages are also used to calculate the creature’s fittest, strongest, cleverest cream of the species or the older, wiser, 
attributes given in its description. Remember that a creature more experienced survivors. When designing creatures as adversar- 
with INS uses this to replace INT when calculating Action ies or points of interaction, Games Masters should take into account 
Points and Initiative. these possible exceptions, and adjust skills according to the creature’s 

& Hit Locations — Every creature has Hit Locations and Hit age, degree of maturity, life lessons, wisdom, and so forth. It is rea- 
Points. Humanoid creatures use the same Hit Locations range sonable to increase appropriate skills by a further 20 to 40 percen- 
as humans although there may be some variations depending tiles to reflect these elements. 
on precise physiology. Creatures with physiologies differing Therefore it is perfectly valid for characters to encounter sea- 
from humans have a different range of Hit Locations. A sum- soned creatures which far exceed the average in terms of skill, thus 
mary of the different physiology Hit Locations (quadruped, remaining a challenge even for the toughest of adventurers. 
winged, and so on) are provided on pages 276-277. 

& Attributes — The creature’s Action Points, Movement, Initia- 

tive Bonus, and so forth, are figured using the Average charac- How t1o BAaLlaANnCcEe CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

teristic values but otherwise according to the same rules as for 
AGgAaIiNnSsTt CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

humans, as found in the Basic Character Creation chapter. 
The common reason for introducing a creature is combat. In 

& Armour — What armour, natural or fabricated, the creature 
this case the skills the creature has — especially in terms of Com- 

has. Creatures with natural armour, such as scales or a thick 
bat Styles and skills frequently used in combat, such as Endurance 

hide, do not incur any Armour Penalty to their Initiative. 
and Evade — should be considered in comparison with the skills of 

& Abilities — Specific abilities possessed by the creature (such 
the characters likely to battle it. There is no hard and fast need to 

as Flying). 
balance creatures against character skills: one of the challenges is 

& Magic — If a creature uses magic then the type of magic it 
in seeing how well characters fare against opponents that have a 

uses, and the necessary skills (Folk Magic, for instance) are 
degree of edge; but if characters frequently find themselves facing 

also listed here along with typical spells its uses. 
creatures that have substantially better skills and, perhaps even more 

& Skills — Every creature has the skills Athletics, Brawn, Endur- 
importantly, numbers, the likelihood of character injury and death 

ance, Evade and Willpower listed. Other skills pertinent to the 
rises dramatically, which can be frustrating for the players. Here, 

creature, such as Swim, are listed where needed. The values 

219



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

then, are some guidelines for helping to balance encounters whilst develop an instinct for what their group can handle according to the 
still retaining tension and challenge. player’s roleplaying style and aggressiveness. 

1. Look at the abilities a creature has. Certain abilities give 
How CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs FIigGhHTt 

creatures an innate advantage over opponents. Decide how 
Sapient creatures apply their intelligence and reasoning to their 

these abilities will be used by the creature, and consider 
environment, opponents and the impending combat It is relatively 

whether the potency of an ability means that the number 
easy for Games Masters to direct the actions of sapient species 

of creatures of the same type the characters face should be 
because humans, being sapient, naturally relate to reasoning, and 

equal to, or less than, the size of the character’s party. 
reasoned assessments. 

2. Consider the example skills of the creature, especially those 
Creatures that operate primarily on instinct — animals, naturally, 

involved in combat, and compare them with either the 
but any creature with the INS characteristic — tend to act differently; 

average skills of the party or the character with the highest 
which will mean combat situations need to be handled according to 

similar skill. If the creature’s skills, and certainly its Combat 
how animals and instinct-driven creatures usually act if the combat 

Style, are equal to the characters’, or in a range of 10 to 
is to be portrayed with any degree of verisimilitude. 

20 points higher, then the challenge posed should still be 
The following notes are designed to help Games Masters prepare 

manageable. 
and run such encounters in a realistic and challenging manner. 

3. Also consider the Armour, Hit Points and Weapons of the 
creature. Tougher creatures take longer to subdue or kill. 

REeAaSsoONnSs fFoOrR ATtTtaAcCkK 
Creatures with fearsome weapons will inflict a lot of dam- Animals rarely attack without purpose. Random, unprovoked 
age, and could potentially carve a swathe through the char- attacks are relatively uncommon, and even the smartest animal usu- 
acters, especially if encountered in large numbers. ally has a reason for initiating combat. Food is a primary motivator, 

4. Think about the creature’s tactics, habits and nature. Some but it is rare for animals to attack something bigger than themselves 
perform hit and run tactics, slowly whittling down their foes unless they operate in numbers large enough to overwhelm the prey. 
whereas others only attack from ambush. Choosing differ- Lone animals, especially those of roughly human size and mass, are 
ent tactics can radically change how an encounter plays out. likely to steer clear of humans unless absolutely driven by starvation 
See How Creatures Fight below. to contemplate an attack. The second motivator is the protection 

5. Understand the effect of numbers. Multiple numbers of of herd or offspring. If an animal has young, then the young are a 
smaller, weaker or less skilled creatures can be set against a target for predators: the parents will therefore instinctively attack a 
party, outnumbering them two or three to one if well han- potential predator with the aim of driving it away, and making sure 
dled. Creatures which approach equivalence with charac- it understands that the young are not an easy feast. Thirdly there are 
ters should rarely outnumber the party save for climactic creatures who seek to defend their territory, secking to conserve its 
situations. Those that are more potent should themselves resources for their own use. In all these situations a fight to the death 
be outnumbered by the characters, or else the party be is not necessarily on the agenda. 
obliterated. 

6. Does a creature use magic? If so, will it have had the chance ]JuUdDGg]inNgG tThHEe oODdDdSs 

to prepare any spells prior to engagement? Magic using Most dangerous animals prefer to have little to do with humans, 
creatures tend be sapient, and so they should use magic with and don’t take on superior numbers. They normally only fight when 
a similar degree of tactical thought as the player characters. the advantage is in their favour; such as one on one or when their 
The type of magic and spells available will also be helpful in victim is sleeping. 
deciding numbers present. Similarly, competency in magic 
and the spells available may need to be balanced with the InNtTiImMiIdDaAtTiIoOnN 
characters’ own magical skills and spells. Many animals rarely get round to initiating combat. Large her- 

7. Tinally, never assume that all creatures fight to the bitter bivores for example will tend to intimidate first. This can be used to 

end. A cornered animal may have no choice, but whenever scare a party or give them fair warning that something bad might 

circumstances permit it the law of survival takes over, and happen if they force the issue. Backing off might ‘win’ them the 

creatures will flee or surrender, depending on their nature. encounter, as the animal is likely to also depart peacefully if the 

The fittest only prevail if they survive and learn from their threat is removed. After all it doesn’t want to be injured either. Pred- 

experience and this equally true for all creatures. Only the ators, too, use intimidation to warn off threats, although the chances 

most desperate and insane will fight to the absolute death. If of intimidation turning into aggression are likely to be higher, espe- 

a pack leader flees, then its followers are likely to follow on cially if the characters represent an easy meal. Intimidation takes 

its heels. Similarly, unless the creatures view the characters the form of physical and verbal gestures: growling, snarling, lowered 

as food, they are unlikely to kill those that submit, flee or horns, raking of the ground and slow, deliberate movements towards 

withdraw. This simple fact alone can be used to balance an the foe which allow energy to be prepared for a blistering assault if 

encounter and ensure that complete bloodbaths are a rarity. necessary. Intimidatory tactics are designed to get the foe to increase 
its distance, and flee. Only if intimidation fails will most animals 

Other than this advice MYTHRAS does not provide any hard rules 
launch an attack. 

to balance creature encounters, since the variables of any conflict 
are too diverse to model. However, Games Masters should find they 

220



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

KIiLllLiInNgG i1sS nNOoTt AaLlwWAaYySs tThHEe oOBbJjEeCcTtIivVEe its victims by slow attrition until they realise the challenge faced, and 

In some circumstances creatures are not really interested in kill- adapt their tactics accordingly. 

ing humans, even when deliberately provoked or attacked. In such 
situations if a creature manages to injure its attackers, it will not POo1isSoOnN AanNDd LeEaAVvEe ThHEemM 

necessarily attempt to kill its foe or even inflict a lethal Special Effect. Similar in concept to the Hit and Run except the venomous crea- 

All it really wants is to be left alone, and will cease fighting once ture remains just long enough to give a victim an incapacitating or 

resistance ceases, leaving the wounded behind it. fatal dose of venom then retreats before it can be hurt. The creature 
then follows its poisoned victim until it is unable to defend itself and 

FLleEeEiInNgG rRaAtThHEeRr tThHaAnN dDEeAatThH can be eaten, used as an egg incubator, and so on. 

Many, indeed most creatures will flee when wounded. This can 
turn a simple combat encounter into a tracking challenge or game ATtTtaAcCkK bByY PAaCckK 
of cat and mouse, since most animals have superior movement rates A classic tactic of wolves, lions, and similar creatures which tend 

and abilities to humans in their natural environment. Superior not to face their prey one on one. Most of the pack simply circles the 

numbers may influence fight-or-flee decisions, and be instigated by a victim whilst one member jumps forward to make a single attack, 

pack or herd leader, but usually a creature will attempt to flee rather then immediately evades back out of reach, whilst a new pack 

than face certain extinction. member subsequently attacks from another direction. Packs will not 
attack simultaneously unless the fighting area is too small for them 

BEeIinNgG OUuTtNnUuMmBbEeRrEeDd to spread out (as they instinctively prefer). Likewise a herd of herbi- 

Understand the limits of a lone creature. Placing a large bear vores can be a serious threat if they gang up to protect their young 

against a party using spears will simply see the bear being slaugh- (as elephants do) or stampede towards a party. 

tered. Do not think that it means the combat system is broken: it 
is precisely what would happen in real life. The bear might get to FiIgGhHTtIinNgG aATt EXxTtrReEmMEe CLlOoSsEe RAaNnGgEe 

wound or maim one or two opponents but ultimately, being outnum- The safest defence for most animals is to close down into extreme 

bered, it will lose (assuming it cannot flee). close range. This can be done automatically if the creature has leapt 
on its victim, ambushed it, or charges into contact. The creature 

UNnuussuAaLl TacTtiics could even use the Change Range special effect if the tactical situ- 

Predators use tactical tricks to catch prey. Games Masters should ation starts differently. Once closed upon, the victim will be unable 

replicate this. A hunting creature will not willingly attack multiple to defend themselves with most weapons, and will probably have to 

opponents head-on but it will use stealth and camouflage to creep resort to Unarmed Combat. In this situation, provided the animal 

up on a victim and attack with surprise. If stalking a dangerous foe isn’t outnumbered, it should gain the upper hand; especially if it is 

it will ambush a lone target, not one surrounded by compatriots. A sitting on top of a prone victim. 

man-eating tiger for instance will leap on someone going into the 
bushes to relieve himself; or sneak into the outermost tent of a camp. CHhAaRrGgIinNGg 
If it incapacitates the victim, it will drag him off into concealment Being repeatedly charged (or dive bombed) by a fast moving ani- 

before any cries can summon aid. In these sorts of situations a crea- mal is especially disconcerting. Using a charge means the victim has 

ture might use Grip and Entangle or have their own special Combat a single choice of whether to Evade, Defend or Attack the charging 

Effects such as Silent Attack or Paralyse. Big creatures with long tails beast as it thunders by. The creature may also have the Trample 

might be able to do sweep attacks to take down multiple foes; those ability which is really bad for the victim if knocked over during the 

with tentacles might grapple multiple opponents; sabre tooth cats charge. Between each attack the creature can gallop past, and be out 

might always begin with knocking a victim prone, and so on. of range or back into cover, then spend an indeterminate period of 
time preparing for the next attack. A rhino or aurochs would be a 

USsIinNgG TEeRrRrAaIinN good example of a creature using this tactic. 

Animals adapted to particular environments have an additional 
advantage. Imagine a giant trapdoor spider which not only grabs UNnAaRrMmEeDd COoMmBbAaTt 
the last person in a line (so that the other characters cannot see what 
happens) but also drags the body into a narrow underground burrow COoNnSsIiDdEeRrAaTtIioONnSs 
where it can crunch on its victim’s body whilst none of his friends The Unarmed skill has been subsumed into some creatures’ 
can reach him. Other examples might be apes which swing down Combat Style, providing a general sense of how they fight with nat- 
from high tree limbs to strike or grab opponents, where the dense ural weapons. INS-based creatures can normally only attack once 
foliage may block vision and missile weapons. Consider the envi- with each limb or location per round; thus a giant scorpion with 
ronment and the creature’s place within it, using the nature of the three Combat Actions could attack once with its left claw, once with 
environment against the opponents. the right, and attempt one sting per round. 

Some animals however, especially herbivores, only possess a sin- 
Hiit AanNDd RUuNn gle method of attack, which appears to place them at a disadvantage 

Very frustrating, but true to the genre of fantastical game hunters 
in close combat. In these cases the creature is more likely to evade 

is the smart carnivore which injures members of the safari one by or simply flee from attack, and should be roleplayed doing so. Other 
one. The animal does not remain around for an extended combat. animals might attack using other tactics already explored in the pre- 
Instead it lays ambushes, leaping out to make a single bite or claw vious section. 
attack before diving back into cover, and escaping reprisal. It beats 

221



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

UNnAaRrMmEeDd COoMmBbAaTt AaGgAaIinNSsTt WEeAaPpOoNnSs Deerfaurlt NAaTtUuRrAaLl WEeAaPpOoNnSs fFoOrR 

As described in the Combat chapter, unarmed combat can be UNnUuSsUuAaLlLlYy S1izZeEdD CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 
used defensively to parry a weapon attack. Damage is reduced as The damage capability of a creature’s natural weapons is usually 
per normal, according to the comparative Sizes of the natural and a function of its basic size. Some beings however may have unusually 
wielded weapon. Whilst this often plays into the favour of bigger big or small examples depending on its physiology and proportions. 
creatures, especially when bashing through the defence of an armed Humans for example have ineffectual natural weapons, thus the size 
opponent, it does not necessarily cut both ways. and damage of their limbs is one step less than default, dropping to 

It is actually quite rare for non-sapient beasts to actively parry 1d3 damage, Size Small and Reach Touch. 
weapon blows, since they lack the intellect and knowledge of how to Games Masters should treat the following tables as average val- 
do so in relative safety. Instead most INS based creatures in fact rely ues. If a creature has more than one type of natural weapon, the 
upon their natural armour or use evasion to avoid an attack. Size or Reach of one may be increased, possibly at the expense of 

In a few cases however, a creature with an instinctive blocking reducing the value of another. The values in the following tables 
or grappling combat style might actually be able to parry an attack. have been applied to most of the creatures within this book, with 
Likewise animals possessing resilient armaments of chitin, horn or some variation for those with body frames and limbs disproportion- 
similar substances may simply flail about, accidentally interposing ate to their mass. 
their natural weapons in the path of a blow. These creatures are 
given the Formidable Natural Weapons trait, permitting them to NAaTtUuRrAaLl WEeAaPpOoNn DAaMmAaGgEe 

parry in combat. 
Creature SIZ BashiCrushiClaz te/Stab Damage 

This does not mean that an unarmed creature lacking the For- Damage 

midable Natural Weapons trait cannot attempt to parry the blow 1-10 1d3 1d4 

anyway. Doing so can potentially prevent their foe from gaining an 11-20 1d4 1d6 

automatic combat Special Effect against them; but if the attack is 
21-30 1d6 1d8 

successful the creature must suffer any damage directly to the limb 
31-40 1d8 1d10 

used to successtully parry. Armour Points on that location still count 
41-50 1d10 1d12 

towards protection. 
51-60 1d12 2d6 

NAaTtUuRrAaLl WEeAaPpOoNn COoMmBbAaTt EFfFfEeCcTtSs 
Similar to weapons such as swords or spears, natural weapons are NAaTtUuRrAaLl WEeAaPpOoNn S1izZeE AanNDd REeAaCchH 

able to inflict certain special effects in combat due to their shape and 
flexibility. The following table lists what weapon-specific effects are Creature Size Bite Horn Limb To;‘i:e l 

available to each type of natural weapon. SIZ Reach Reach Reach Reach 

NAaTtUuRrAaLl WEeAaPpOoNnSs SPpEeCcIiaALl EFfFfEeCcTtSs 1-10 S T T S M 

11-20 M T S M M 
Type Combat Effects 

21-30 L S M M L 
Beak, Pointed Impale 

31-40 H M M L L 
Beak, Tearing Bleed, Grip 

41-50 E M L L VL 
Claws/Talons Bleed, Grip 

51-60 (@ L L VL VL 
Hand/Fist Grip, Stun Location, Take Weapon 

Hoof Bash, Stun 

Horns Impale 

Paw Stun Location ARrMmEeDd COoMmBbAaTt 
Pincer Grip, Sunder 

Proboscis Impale COoNnSsIiDdEeRrAaTtIioONnSs 
Stinger Impale Most situations involving armed combat are covered in the Com- 

Tail Bash, Entangle, Grip bat chapter. However, due to the scaling imposed by creatures which 

Teeth, Crushing Grip are either bigger or smaller than average humans, several important 
modifications are clarified here. 

Teeth, Grasping Grip, Impale 

Teeth, Incising Bleed 
WEeAaPpOoNn MOoDIdFifIiCcAaTtIioONnSs fFoOrR 

Tentacle Grip, Take Weapon 
UNnUuSsUuAaLlLlYy S1izZeEdD CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Tusk Impale 
When a creature wields a weapon rather than fighting unarmed, 

Wing Bash, Entangle it gains certain bonuses or penalties which reflect the consequence 
of its size. Thus a mace used by a man, and a mace used by a troll 
are ostensibly the same style of weapon, proportionately in scale 
with their wielders; but the troll mace will be somewhat larger, and 
more massive. This bonus also counts for ranged weapons, providing 
they are built to scale. 

222



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

For each 10 points of SIZ over 20 the wielder gains a bonus of 
+1 step to both weapon Size and Reach. DEeSsIigGnNIinNgG YoOUuRr 

If the increased weapon characteristics place the creature beyond 
the nominal human sized maximums of Enormous and Very Long, OwwWnN CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 
blows effectively become unstoppable, and the body of the creature Games Masters are encouraged to design their own MYTHRAS 

unreachable by most player characters, and thus further steps need creatures — be they creatures from myth and legend, those inspired 

not be considered. by popular fantasy fiction, or even unique creations of the Games 

If a fight is staged between two colossal creatures, Games Mas- Master’s own imagination. There are two approaches one can take. 

ters can note the number of bonus steps, and base a ruling on the Find a creature from this chapter that approximates the new 

comparative vales to see if a defending creature is capable of deflect- creature, and then modify its characteristics, abilities, skills, and so 

ing such blows, or can enter range. forth to reflect the new beast. This is usually the easiest method as 
much of the work is done for you, and the key task is in tailoring the 

WEeAaPpOoNn Sii1zzeE aAnNDd REeaAcChH BOoNnUuSs new creature to make it distinct. 

Armed Creature The second approach is to build the creature from scratch. Here 
SIz Weapon Size Bonus Weapon Reach Bonus 

are some guidelines to assist. 

1-10 -1 Step -1 Step 

11-20 - - 1. Creature characteristics are figured using d3 or d6 multi- 
ples in a very similar way to humans. No creature should 

21-30 +1 Step +1 Step 
have more than 4d6 in any characteristic, but bigger, more 

31-40 +2 Steps +2 Steps 
powerful/faster creatures incorporate a generous addition 

41-50 +3 Steps +3 Steps 
to this roll. A mammoth, for example, has STR 2d6+40 
giving it a range of 42 to 52 and an average of 47. 

WEeAaPpOoNn CAaTtEegGoORrYy PRrOoGgRrEeSsSsIioOnN 
2. How big is the creature? If roughly human-sized then it is 

reasonable to use 2d6+6 as the base for its SIZ character- 
Small Touch istic. If it is larger then consider by how much, and either 

Medium Short adjust the dice used for SIZ or the bonus to the dice roll if 

Large Medium a minimum SIZ increase is needed. Note that the creatures 
presented here use a SIZ value based on mass, and that the 

Huge Long 
Creature Size Equivalency table does not scale linearly. So 

Enormous Very Long 
the bigger the base SIZ the fewer dice should be used — oth- 

Colossal Unreachable 
erwise the dice spread could allow creatures of two to three 
times the mass of an average specimen. 

3. A creature’s STR does not necessarily need to be the same 
WIiEeLlDdIinNgG DIiSspPrRoOPpOoRrTtIioONnAaTtEeLlYy S1iIzZeEdD WEeAaPpOoNnSs as its SIZ, since as creatures grow bigger their strength to 

Sometimes a character might wish to loot a monstrous foe of his 
mass ratio tends to drop. A lower STR value also helps keep 

weapon, and attempt to utilise it in combat. This may pose problems 
a creature’s Damage Bonus within the bounds of surviv- 

for, whilst a human-scaled shortsword may be the equivalent of a 
ability for armoured humans — a necessary consideration if 

mere dagger to a troll, conversely the troll’s two handed maul would 
your creature is intended to fight against characters. 

be too massive to wield for a normal man. 
4. How intelligent is the creature? Sapient creatures — those 

Use the following table to discern the largest single handed and 
with the ability to reason, problem-solve and be driven by 

double handed ‘Size’ of weapon a creature can use. This is only a 
choice rather than instinct — should have a base of 2d6+6 

rough guideline since some weapons are utilised in unusual ways, 
to place them on a par with humans, if their INT is likely 

couched lances for example. 
to be in the human range. Of course some creatures may 
have more refined intellects, or indeed, be rather slow wit- 

MAaximMmuumM WEeAaPpOoNn Sii1zzeE ted, and barely better thinkers than animals. Calculate INS 

Character SIZ Largest Single Largest Double as described in Intelligence and Instinct at the start of this 

Handed Handed* chapter. 

1-10 Small Large 5. The creature’s DEX should be assessed and figured in a 
similar way to STR, SIZ and INT/INS. Fast, agile crea- 

11-20 Medium Huge 
tures or those with many limbs will naturally have a higher 

21-30 Large Enormous 
DEX than humans so adjust the dice and/or dice addition 

31-40 Huge Colossal 
to reflect its DEX relative to a human. Slow sluggish beasts 

41-50 Enormous Don’t even think about it! 
will naturally have a lower DEX rating. 

* Use this column for single-handed shields 6. POW for most sapient creatures is in the human range of 
3d6. However some supernatural monsters or mythical 
creatures may have a higher propensity for magic in some 
form, or be products of it. In this case raise the dice or dice 
addition to reflect any innate magical tendencies or pro- 
pensities. Mundane animals tend to have less POW), rarely 

223



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

CRrEeAaTtUuRrEe S1IZ EQqUuIiVvAaLleEnNCcYy TAaBbLlEe 
FiIgGhHTtIinNgG QUuAaDdRrUuPpEeDdSs 

SI1zZ Kilos SI1zZ Kilos SI1zZ Kilos SIZ Kilos 
As a rule when four legged animals fight, the creature places its head 

1 up to 5 26 238-258 51 2069-2259 | 76~ 18001-19600 
lowards its opponent. Given the size of most quadrupeds, it s difficultfor 
a lone human opponent to strike any location other than the forequarters, 2 6-11 27 259-282 52 2260-2468 | 77 19601-21500 

Jront legs or head of the beast. For this reason, it s suggested that when a 3 12-16 28 238-307 53 2469-2690 | 78  21501-23400 

character attacks such an animal, they roll a d10+10 for the Hit Loca- 4 17-23 29 308-335 57 2691-2931 79 23401-25800 

tion. Of course, tf the animal is surrounded by multiplef oes, then thefull 5 24-35 30 336-366 55 2932-3199 | 80  25801-27800 

range of uls target locations should be available. 6 36-41 3l 367-399 56 3200-3490 | 81 27801-30300 

N 4 7 42-49 32 400-436 57 3491-3809 | 82 30301-33100 

8 50-55 58 437-476 58 3810-4149 | 83  33101-36100 

exceeding 2d6, with smaller animals or more primitive 9 56-58 34 477-518 59 4150-4531 84 36101-39400 
insectoid life possessing even less. 10 59-64 5 519-567 60 4532-4954 | 85  39401-43000 

7. Charisma is only of importance when designing sapient 
11 65-70 36 568-617 61 4955-5363 | 86  43001-46700 

creatures that interact socially on a meaningful scale and 
12 71-76 37 618-672 62 5364-5863 | 87  46701-51200 

with other species. CHA is a measure of personality and its 
13 77-83 38 673-754 63 5864-6409 | 88  51201-55800 

communication rather than looks and appearance, so use 
14 84-91 39 755-799 64 6410-7000 | 89  55801-59400 

the human range of 3d6 as the base, and adjust upwards 
or downwards only if the creature’s personality is espe- 15 92-99 40 800-872 65 7001-7600 | 90  59401-66300 

cially extrovert, introvert or alien. In games where the char- 16 100-109 | 41 873-950 66 7601-8300 | 91 66301-67500 

acters are all members of a non humano-centric species, 17 110-118 | 42 951-1040 67 8301-9000 |92  67501-71900 

the Games Master can adjust CHA scores so that it is the 18 119-130 | 43 1041-1131 68 9001-9800 | 93  71901-76700 

characters’ race who get 3d6, and the weird humans who 19 131-140 | 44 1132-1231 69  9801-10800 | 94  76701-81700 

have less, since they cannot understand or comprehend the 20 141-154 | 45 1232-1349 | 70  10801-11700 | 95  81701-87100 
culture. 

21 155-167 | 46 1350-1468 | 71  11701-12800 | 96  87101-87900 
8. Skills should be chosen according to the creature’s primary 

22 168-182 | 47 1469-1599 72 12801-14000 | 97  87901-88800 
needs and its environment. Sapient, social creatures obvi- 

23 183-199 | 48 1600-1741 73 14001-15100 | 98  88801-89700 
ously may have access to the full range of human skills whilst 
others will have only those skills related to their immediate 24 200-218 | 49 1742-1899 | 74  15101-16600 | 99  89701-90600 

needs and capabilities. Skill base values are figured as per 25 219-237 | 50 1900-2068 75 16601-18000 | 100  90601-91500 

humans, but should then be subject to further adjustment - 
say +30% - to reflect the creature’s nature. CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Abilities follow from the creature’s nature. Aerial creatures obvi- The creatures that follow are derived from myth, legend, the nat- 
ously need the Flying ability; aquatic creatures need the Swimmer ural world and, in a few cases, popular fantasy media. A broad selec- 
ability, and so on. Consider the creature’s overall nature, physiology, tion is given, and is by no means exhaustive. In some cases similar 
faculties, environment, and any specific, exotic talents it might dis- species with slightly different appearances have been conflated. In 
play and apply the relevant abilities. It is recommended though that, the main these are corporeal creatures; the more intangible threats 
except in rare cases, few creatures receive more than three abilities such as ghostly phantoms or wraiths have their own section subtitled 
from those listed earlier in this chapter. Spirits. 

There is also a focus on creatures that offer a legitimate challenge 

COoMmPpAaRrAaTtIiVvEe WEeIiGgHhTtSs to MYTHRAS characters — for this reason we have not included some 
examples, mainly animals, which would offer little in the way of 

Creatures do not follow the same height and weight progression 
danger or will typically run and hide when adventurers stray into 

as for humanoids. Increasing SIZ relates to a different scaling of 
their territories. 

mass, muscle and bone density. Generally MYTHRAS keeps specific 
weights abstracted, but should it be necessary to know the rough 
weight of a creature, use the following SIZ Equivalency Table. The 
table can also be used for determining the weight of inanimate 
objects. 

Note that since SIZ is abstracted to a degree, the reach and 
size of natural weapons should be adjusted to cater for differently 
dimensioned and proportioned creatures. 

224



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

ACcEePpHhAaLlIi 
A strange race of humanoids that completely lack any form 

of head or neck. The acephali’s facial features are located instead 
across its chest and abdomen meaning that these creatures cannot 
wear any form of clothing or armour across these areas. 

Acephali are primitive herders and shepherds occupying hilly 
terrain. They make crude stone huts and cabins, but prefer natural 
caves when they can be found. They are a surly, but not necessarily 
aggressive race, which prefers to keep its own company. Most sapi- 
ents find the lack of a head extremely disturbing making communi- 
cation with acephali tense at the best of times. 

Given the vulnerability of their chest and abdominal regions 
acephali prefer ranged weapons and try to avoid melee combat. 
They are excellent slingers and archers. Some acephali carry a spe- 
cially crafted heater with an eye-slit carved above the boss allowing 
for the chest and abdomen to be protected with passive blocking 
whilst the free arm is used to wield the sling. 

Acephali Attributes 

STR: 2d6+6 (13) Action Points 3 

CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier +1d2 

SIZ: 2d6+6 (13) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 8m 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 11 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Typically Leather 

CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities None 

Magic Tolk Magic 56% (Befuddle, 

Coordination, Firearrow) 

1d20 Location AP/HP 
ANnTt,, GIiaAnNTt 

1-3 Right Leg 1/5 
Giant ants are hive-dwellers, and operate under the direction of 

46 Left Leg 1/5 a queen with individuals taking on very specific roles (typically war- 

7-10 Abdomen 0/6 rior or worker) necessary for the survival of the hive. Individual ants 
have highly developed instincts but working together in groups their 

11-14 Chest/Face 0/7 
intelligence shows remarkable degrees of problem-solving. Giant 

15-17 Right Arm 1/4 ants are also formidable predators, herding and farming smaller 
18-20 Left Arm 1/4 species of mammals and insects for food and, sometimes, incubation 

of eggs. 
Skills Giant ants use their powerful mandibles to seize, squeeze, and 

Athletics 56%, Brawn 46%, Endurance 52%, Evade 46%, Perception 44%, crush foes. Once seized the ant uses the Grip Combat Effect to hold 
Survival 52%, Track 54%, Willpower 52% onto its prey and, if it continues to resist, moves its thorax around to 

deliver a powerful sting. If poisoned the victim is allowed an Endur- 
Passions ance roll, opposed by the ant’s Endurance, to resist the poison. If the 
Love Solitude 88%, Suspicious of Strangers 80% roll is failed then the location suffers agonising pain, and cannot be 

used for 30-CON minutes. 
Combat Style & Weapons Individual ants are unlikely to engage foes larger than themselves, 
Acephali Hunter (Sling, Bolas, Bow) 66%, Defensive Stance (Spear, Shield) 56% although packs of ants, working together, will have no hesitation in 

attacking. Single ants prefer to evade, wait, and send pheromone 
Weapon Size/ Force Reach Damage 

signals to nearby (or even distant) colleagues, summoning a larger 
Sling L - 1d8+1d2 1/2 party. 

2/2 The statistics overleaf are for a worker or soldier ant. Queens are 
Bolas - - 1d4+1d2 

Entangle twice as large and twice as strong: 4d6+14 STR and SIZ but have 

Short Bow L - 1d6+1d2 4/4 a DEX of only 2d6, reflecting their largely stationery existence in 
the hive. 

Shortspear M L 1d8+1+1d2 4/5 

Heater L S 1d4+1+1d2 6/12 

225



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Ant, Giant Attributes Asipatra Attributes 

STR: 4d6 (14) Action Points 2 STR: 1d6+9 (13) Action Points 3 

CON: 3d6+6 (17) Damage Modifier ~ +1d2 CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier None 

SIZ: 4d6 (14) Magic Points 4 SIZ: 1d6+6 (10) Magic Points 7 

DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 12m DEX: 4d6+6 (20) Movement 12m (Flying) 

INS: 2d6+2 (9) Initiative Bonus 11 INS: 2d6+5 (12) Initiative Bonus 16 

POW: 1d6 (4) Armour Chitin POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Metal Feathers 

Abilities Formidable Natural Weapons, Abilities Diving Attack, Flying, 

Venomous Immunity (Blades) 

Magic None Magic None 

1d20 Location AP/HP 1d20 Location AP/HP 

1 Right Rear Leg 4/6 1-3 Right Claw 6/5 

2 Left Rear Leg 4/6 4-6 Left Claw 6/5 

3 Right Middle Leg 4/6 79 Abdomen 6/6 

4 Left Middle Leg 4/6 10-12 Chest 6/7 

59 Abdomen 4/8 13-15 Right Wing 6/5 

10-13 Thorax 4/9 16-18 Left Wing 6/5 

14 Right Front Leg 4/6 19-20 Head 6/5 

15 Left Front Leg 4/6 

16-20 Head 4/7 

Athletics 32%, Brawn 23%, Endurance 62%, Evade 60%, Fly 72%, Perception 

Skills 59%, Willpower 54% 

Athletics 67%, Brawn 68%, Endurance 74%, Evade 56%, Perception 53%, Track 
Combat Style & Weapons 

66%, Willpower 48% 

Slice and Dice (Claws and Wings) 72% 

Combat Style & Weapons 
Weapon Size /Force Reach Damage 

Ant Attack (Mandibles and Sting) 67% 

Claw S S 1d4 As for Claw 

Size/ Force Reach Damage 
Wing Slice M M 1d6 As for Wing 

Bite M T 1d6+1d2 1/2 

Sting M M 1d4+1d2 As for Head AUuRrOoCcHhSs 
Standing nearly 2m at the shoulder, aurochs are a giant Pleis- 

ASsIipPaAtTrRaA tocene cattle species found across much of northern Europe. They 

A large bird of Hindu myth, asipatra means ‘sword wing’, and are famed for their strength and belligerence. Hunting aurochs is a 

these creatures are the tormentors of souls in the underworld, carv- near suicidal pastime but very rewarding in terms of the quantity of 

ing them with their blade-like wings, and dagger-length claws. meat provided. 

In MyrHRAS these monsters are either summoned from the Aurochs prefer to fight by charging threats with their gore attack. 

underworld or have found their way to the mundane world through If the target is knocked prone and continues to move, the aurochs 

obscure gateways, portals or tunnels. They aim solely to torment and tramples until the victim stops responding. A successful charge 

frustrate, diving and strafing those marked for persecution, inflicting increases the Damage Bonus to 2d8. If lamed an aurochs continues 

painful slices and cuts. Being made of metal they are exceedingly to fight in place until it collapses from exhaustion. 

well-armoured but can still be felled by mundane weapons: note Aurochs horns can span greater than a man’s reach, and curve 

though that they are utterly immune to bladed weapons — swords, forwards from the head in a perfect charging/goring configuration. 

spears, axes, and so forth. Arrows and blunt weapons inflict normal Naturally the horns can impale, and this is a standard Special Effect 

damage. if a charging aurochs manages to gore an enemy. Aurochs horns are 

Usually encountered singly, asipatra are summoned for a specific capable of both Sundering and Impaling and, if a foe is impaled, the 

purpose, be it to punish someone or act as guardians. Others that bull on its next turn will attempt to throw its victim with a toss of its 

migrate from the underworld come searching for those who have head. If the impaled victim is conscious, he may pit either his Athlet- 

committed some form of sin in the eyes of a particular god, and so ics or Acrobatics against the Brawn of the bull. If successful, he may 

can be encountered in numbers; sent as divine punishment for some land safely on his feet or all fours. If unsuccesstul, or if unconscious, 

kind of wrong-doing. the victim suffers the equivalent to a 1d6 metre fall and lands prone. 

Asipatra confined to the mortal world for any length of time 
collect spears, swords, and other sharp objects, forming nests from 
them. 

226



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Aurochs Attributes Baboon Attributes 

STR: 2d6+24 (31) Action Points 2 STR: 1d6+6 (10) Action Points 3 

CON: 3d6+10 (21) Damage Modifier +2d6 CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier -1d2 

SIZ: 4d6+24 (38) Magic Points 7 SIZ: 1d6+6 (10) Magic Points 7 

DEX: 2d6 (7) Movement 12m DEX: 3d6+6 (17) Movement 8m 

INS: 2d6+4 (11) Initiative Bonus 9 INS: 2d6+7 (14) Initiative Bonus 16 

POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Tough Hide POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Fur 

Abilities Intimidate, Trample Abilities Nightsight 

Magic None Magic None 

1d20 Location AP/HP 1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-2 Right Hind Leg 4/12 1-3 Right Leg 1/5 

34 Left Hind Leg 4/12 4-6 Left Leg 1/5 

5-7 Hindquarters 4/13 7-9 Abdomen 1/6 

8-10 Forequarters 4/14 10-12 Chest 1/7 

11-13 Right Front Leg 4/11 13-15 Right Arm 1/4 

14-16 Left Front Leg 4/11 16-18 Left Arm 1/4 

17-20 Head 4/12 19-20 Head 1/5 

Skills 

Athletics 58%, Brawn 89%, Endurance 82%, Evade 34%, Perception 38%, Acrobatics 57%, Athletics 47%, Brawn 40%, Endurance 42%, Evade 74%, 

Willpower 38% Perception 61%, Stealth 61%, Survival 58%, Willpower 54% 

Combat Style & Weapons Combat Style & Weapons 

Gore and Toss (Horns) 68% TFerocious Fracas (Bite, Fist, Thrown Object) 67% 

Weapon Size/ Force Reach Damage Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Gore H M 1d10+2d6 As for Head Bite S T 1d4-1d2 As for Head 

Trample E T 4d6 As for Legs Punch S T 1d3-1d2 As for Arm 

Missile S - 1d3-1d2 As for Object 

BaAbBoOoONn 
Baboons are ground dwelling, and typically found in ifi 

BAaGgIiNngi 
open savannah, open woodland, and hill areas in warm and 

Bagini are vampiric, lustful monsters that are half woman, 
sub-tropical climates. Ostensibly omnivores, they eat insects 

and half animal — usually a dingo, dog, wolf or hyena. They pos- 
and occasionally prey on fish, shellfish, small mammals, 

sess the head and breasts of a human with the rest of the creature 
birds, smaller primates, and small antelopes. Baboons 

being canine in form. In the daylight they appear quite normal, 
are foragers and have been known to raid human s 

and may even forming a friendship with a group of travellers. 
dwellings, preying on sheep and goats } 

At night though, the bagini mutates into its true form where 
Troops of baboons usually feature around 30 ¢ 

it feasts on the males present. 
animals but larger troops are not uncommon. A 

The bagini have two appetites that must be served: 
troop leader can be either male or female, and 

the first is their lust, and the monsters seck to be impreg- 
becomes the dominant figure of the group, | 

nated by males they have befriended so they can 
choosing mates, and ensuring the choic- J 

give birth to more bagini bitches. The initial 
est foods. Baboons are highly vocal and 

seduction is performed as a human but 
use their whoops, shrieks and calls to signal 

the impregnation itself takes place as 
to each other and indicate their positioning in the social 

the she-demon’s true body changes. 
hierarchy. 

The second appetite is blood. The 
The baboon template can be used for larger primates but 

bagini bites whilst it ruts, 
adding additional bonuses: such as gorillas (+9 STR, +12 

and drinks the blood it 
SIZ, 2d6+3 DEX) or man-eating carnivorous apes (+12 

draws. 
STR, +15 SIZ, 2d6 DEX). 

In their true form 
bagini  are incredibly 

strong, and capable of pin- 
ning down a grown man while 



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

they satisfy their urges. Their tactic is therefore to drink blood whilst Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 
mating and, if possible, continue to drink blood once the mating 

Bite M T 1d2+1d4 As for Head 
has finished. A bagini will drain a number of Fatigue levels of blood 
equal to half its CON before it considers itself satiated, which can Claw M M 1d3+1d4 As for Arm 

often lead to the death of the victim. If disturbed it will fight unless 
outnumbered. If females are present, bagini will either not approach 

BAaKkRruU 
or attempt to separate the men from the women so their business 

These strange creatures are magical creations: either acciden- 
can be completed with as little suspicion as possible. 

tally, through the misadventure of sorcery, or by the gods out of 
A bagini only uses its bite attack during intercourse, and the 

some obscure whim. Tiny, mischievous creatures that resemble a 
attack usually comes as a surprise if victim doesn’t notice the pre- 

human child with an oversized head, the bakru’s body is made of 
ceding transformation. The actual bite causes minimal damage but 

wood or plant fibres, lending it a strange, gnarled appearance. Their 
the bagini will consequently drain one Fatigue level of blood per 

small stature means they can easily hide and in woodland or under- 
minute thereafter, whilst simultaneously sustaining her coupling. A 

growth are very difficult to spot. It is possible that bakru have some 
bagini prefers the throat for its bite so that it can apply pressure to 

relationship with elves, and some species may even originate from 
the windpipe of the victim, preventing them from calling out. 

Taerie. 
If the bite latches on, the victim must win in an opposed Brawn 

Bakru are intensely magical and use their magic to cause mis- 
roll to prise the creature off. Failure means they are pinned under 

chief and havoc for mortals. Any bakru has a number of Folk Magic 
the creature’s weight, and subject to the Grip special effect. Fur- 

spells equal to its POW, and a number of Theism spells equal to half 
ther efforts can be made to break free, but each subsequent attempt 

its CHA. Games Masters will need to decide precisely what spells 
incurs an additional grade of difficulty. Bagini only use their claws 

are possessed but generally anything that can be used to play pranks, 
in self defence to drive off interlopers which disturb their feeding. 

cause annoyance or interfere are appropriate. 
This version of the bagini is based on Australian aboriginal 

These imps cannot be harmed by mundane weapons. However, 
myth. Yet many cultures describe similar creatures, and there is no 

magical weapons of any kind inflict normal damage. Killing them is 
reason why bagini cannot have more exotic animal types: cat, lizard, 

said to bring extremely bad luck in the form of a curse. To simulate 
or even aquatic species such as dolphin or shark. The latter creates a 

this, Games Masters may wish to inflict some form of poor luck on 
rather memorable variation on the mermaid legend. 

any character who kills a bakru, whether accidentally or deliberately. 
Roll on the accompanying tables to determine the effect and dura- 

Bagini Attributes 
tion of the curse. 

STR: 2d6+12 (19) Action Points 3 

BakkrruuU CUuRrSsEe TYyPpEe 
CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier +1d4 

1d6  Curse Type 
SIZ: 2d6+6 (13) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 3d6+6 (17) Movement 8m The character’s chance to fumble becomes a roll of 90-00 
1 

instead of 99-00 for the duration of the curse. 
INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 15 

All skills become one grade more difficult for the duration of the 
POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Fur 2 

curse. 
CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Life Sense, Night Sight, 

3 The character completely forgets one Professional skill for the 
Vampiric 

duration of the curse. 
Magic Tolk Magic 62% (Glamour, 

4 The character is subject to at least one level of fatigue for the 
Sleep) 

curse’s duration. 

1d20 Location AP/HP 5 The character develops a powerfully repellent odour resulting in 

1-3 Right Leg 1/5 banishment from public places for the curse’s duration. 

4-6 Left Leg 1/5 All harmful or manipulative spells directed by the character at an 

7-9 Abdomen 1/6 opponent affect himself instead, for the curse’s duration. 

10-12 Chest 1/7 
BakkrruuU CUuRrssEe TYyPpEe 

13-15 Right Arm 1/4 
1d6  Duration 

16-18 Left Arm 1/4 
1 1d6 Combat Rounds 

19-20 Head 1/5 
2 1d6 Minutes 

Skills 3 1d6 Hours 

Athletics 56%, Brawn 72%, Endurance 56%, Evade 64%, Influence 62%, 4 1d6 Days 

Perception 54%, Seduction 64%, Stealth 50%, Willpower 62% 5 1d6 Months 

6 1d6 Years 
Passions 

Insatiable Hunger 80%, Love Sex 80%, Hate Mortals 75% 
Alleviating the curse requires some form of propitiation to the 

god who created the bakru, if at all possible. Otherwise, some other 
Combat Style & Weapons 

form of magical healing or alleviation may be necessary, but in such 
Ferocious Fracas (Bite, Fist, Thrown Object) 67% 

228



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

circumstances the Magnitude of the curse is equal to the POW of 
the dead Bakru. 

In those campaigns based on high fantasy, or using the realm of 
Faerie, bakru are a naturally occurring species. Mischevious, some- 
times malevolent, and always a nuisance when they decide to target 
some hapless human (such as cobblers, peddlers, and the like) who 
have caused them some slight... 

Bakru Attributes 

STR: 1d3 (2) Action Points 3 

CON: 1d6+1 (5) Damage Modifier -1d8 

SIZ: 1d3 (2) Magic Points 17 

DEX: 3d6+6 (17) Movement 6m 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 15 

POW: 3d6+6 (17) Armour Wooden Skin 

CHA: 2d6+6 (13) Abilities Immunity (Mundane 

Weapons) 

Magic Tolk Magic 70%, Devotion 

60%, Exhort 66% 

1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Right Leg 1/2 

46 Left Leg 1/2 

7-9 Abdomen 1/3 

10-12 Chest 1/4 

13-15 Right Arm 1/1 

16-18 Left Arm 1/1 power. This forces an opposed roll of the basilisk’s Willpower against 
19-20 Head 1/2 the victim’s Evade (to avert their eyes in time). If the victim loses he 

suffers an immediate Major Wound to the Head, haemorrhaging 
blood from the eyes, ears, nostrils and mouth. A further standard 

Acrobatics 59%, Athletics 49%, Brawn 24%, Deceit 66%, Endurance 30%, Evade Endurance roll is needed on the next round to avoid death. The 
74%, Locale 66%, Perception 70%, Sleight 70%, Stealth 70%, Willpower 74% Death Gaze is also effective against plant-life, causing all but the 

hardiest plants to wither and die against the monster’s evil glare. 
Passions Cluriously, these beasts are not immune to their own gaze; if 
Make Mischief 88%, Take Offence 75% forced to glimpse its own reflection, it must succeed in a Willpower 

roll or die on the spot. 
Combat Style & Weapons Basilisks and cockatrices have little need to enter into physical 
None combat, relying on their gaze and Evade for defence. If injured 

the monster’s acidic blood immediately inflicts 1d6 damage to the 
weapon used (armour points do not protect), with the acid continu- 
ing to inflict damage each round for the next two rounds. 

BAassilLiisskk//CCoOCcKkAaTtRrIicCEe Cluriously, weasels and similar mammals, such as ferrets and the 

A curious— and deadly — combination of rooster and serpent, mongoose, are immune the gaze of the basilisk; their blood, spit and 

basilisks and cockatrice (the former is hatched from the egg of a urine contains a venom wholly poisonous to the monster meaning 

cockerel by a serpent, and the latter from the egg of a serpent by a that such animals are safe from any of the basilisk’s attacks. Sim- 

cockerel) are small but dreadful magical creatures. Being innately ilarly, if a basilisk hears a cock crowing at dawn, it must make an 

evil they detest all life, and deal with it by the glare which is enough immediate Willpower roll or die immediately, meaning that most 

to kill anyone who meets the baleful gaze. basilisks and cockatrice are found far from human habitation. 

Either creature is about the size of a large rooster with a ser- Certain sorcerers believe that a basilisk can be tamed if raised 

pentine body, sometimes with small, useless dragon-like wings, a from the egg by a human parent and will not turn their dreadful 

rooster’s head and wattle, and usually two or occasionally four, roost- gaze against their owner. It takes a brave sorcerer to attempt such 

er-like feet. They are highly, highly reclusive, and often prized by husbandry, and braver adventurers to go hunting basilisk eggs, but 

sorcerers for many bodily components that are useful ingredients in given the highly magical and lethal nature of the monster, the risks 

rituals and spells. The blood of the basilisk is a concentrated acid but may well be thought to be worthwhile. 

its real power lies in its Death Stare. The basilisk must expend both a 
Magic Point and an Action Point on its turn to activate this dreadful 

229



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Basilisk/ Cockatrice Attributes Bear Attributes 

STR: 1d6+1 (5) Action Points 2 STR: 2d6+18 (25) Action Points 3 

CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier -1d6 CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier +1d12 

SIZ: 1d6+1 (5) Magic Points 19 SIZ: 4d6+20 (34) Magic Points 7 

DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 6m DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 8m 

INS: 2d6+4 (11) Initiative Bonus 12 INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 13 

POW: 2d6+12 (19) Armour Scales POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Thick Pelt 

Abilities Gaze Attack, Life Sense, Abilities Intimidate, Nightsight 

Terrifying 
Magic None 

Magic None 

1d20 Location AP/HP 
1d20 Location API/HP 

1-3 Right Rear Leg 3/10 
1-3 Tail 1/4 

46 Left Rear Leg 3/10 
4-5 Right Hind Leg 1/4 

7-9 Hindquarters 3/11 
6-7 Left Hind Leg 1/4 

10-12 Forequarters 3/12 
8-10 Hindquarters 1/5 

13-15 Right Front Leg 3/10 
11-14 Forequarters 1/6 

16-18 Left Front Leg 3/10 
15-16 Right Winglet 1/3 

19-20 Head 3/10 
17-18 Left Winglet 1/3 

19-20 Head 1/4 

Athletics 68%, Brawn 79%, Endurance 66%, Evade 46%, Perception 60%, Stealth 

Skills 66%, Survival 60%, Swim 68%, Track 66%, Willpower 44% 

Athletics 48%, Brawn 30%, Endurance 52%, Evade 66%, Perception 69%, 

Willpower 78% Combat Style & Weapons 

Ursine Fury (Bite and Claws) 78% 

Combat Style & Weapons 
Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Gaze Attack (see description) 

Bite L S 1d8+1d12 As for Head 

Claw H L 1d8+1d12 As for Arm 
BEeaARr 

Bears typically inhabit forested and hilly regions in temperate 
to arctic zones. They are generally solitary animals although moth- BEeeeTtLlEe,, GGiIaAnNTt 
ers and cubs travel together in packs. The following characteristics Giant beetles come in many different species. All species are six- 

represent Grizzly, Kodiak and Polar bears. These are the largest, legged, and some have wings that fold into the carapace. All giant 

fiercest, and most unpredictable of the bear species although their beetles are naturally armoured with chitin across all surfaces save the 

need to attack is generally driven by hunger, curiosity and fear. They underbelly — natural protection against predators although, in their 

will roam far and wide in search of food, even entering settlements giant forms, only the very largest carnivores are a match for them. 

to scavenge, and prey on smaller creatures. They will pursue and Beetles are not necessarily aggressive. Many beetles are omnivo- 

track injured creatures, or those that flee, and leave a discernible rous, feeding on mouldering plant detritus and vegetation, and other 

trail. Like many predators, playing dead does confuse the bear, and invertebrates (and also small mammals). They prefer warm, dark 

cause it to lose interest which may prove to be a life-saver if attacked. conditions, and so are often found underground in their vast bur- 

Despite their size and bulk they are swift and remarkable swimmers rows — a few types are ground-dwellers rather than burrowers. 

and climbers. All giant beetles rely on their armour for defence rather than 

Bears typically attempt to grip with both claws, and then deliver evading. Grasping, and then attempting to dash their foes (or simply 

a bite, although swiping with a claw is also an effective means of continue biting) is a common enough tactic. 

disabling an enemy. Prehistoric ursoids, such as the short-faced bear, Some creatures, such as goblins, orcs, and even dwarves, actively 

tend to be larger and stronger (additional +6 STR, +10 SIZ). breed and farm giant beetles for use as beasts of burden and steeds. 

Playing dead is a tactic oft-cited for dealing with bear attacks. Species that fly are prized amongst those that put these massive 

This is fine if the bear is acting defensively. If hungry, and actively insects to work. 

chasing prey, playing dead may well be quite the wrong way to act. A 
hungry bear does not care if its meal is moving or static... BOoAaRr 

Wild boars inhabit woods and forests in most temperate climates. 
The body of the wild boar is compact; the head is large, whilst the 
legs relatively short. A boar’s coat consists of stiff bristles and finer 
fur. The colour varies from dark grey to black or brown, are there 

230



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Beetle, Giant Attributes 

STR: 2d6+12 (19) Action Points 

CON: 3d6+6 (17) Damage Modifier +1d6 

SIZ: 2d6+12 (19) Magic Points 4 

DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 12m 

INS: 2d6+2 (9) Initiative Bonus 11 

POW: 1d6 (4) Armour Chitin 

Abilities Burrowing, Formidable 

Natural Weapons 

Magic None 

1d20 Location AP/HP 

1 Right Rear Leg 5/7 

2 Left Rear Leg 5/7 

3 Right Middle Leg 5/7 

4 Left Middle Leg 5/7 

59 Abdomen 5/9 

10-13 Thorax 5/10 

14 Right Front Leg 5/7 

15 Left Front Leg 5/7 

16-20 Head 5/8 

Skills 

Athletics 62%, Brawn 68%, Endurance 74%, Evade 26%, Perception 53%, 

Willpower 38% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Beetle Bite (Mandibles) 72% 

Size/Force Reach Damage 

Mandibles M T 1d6+1d6 As for Head 

can be great regional differences in colour. Adult boars measure 
around 2m in length, and stand around 1m at the shoulder. Larger 
specimens are not uncommon. Adult males are equipped with large, Attributes 

sharp tusks used for foraging and fighting, and these tusks lend the STR: 2d6+9 (16) Action Points 2 

boar its fearsome reputation. 
CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier +1d4 

Boars are usually solitary animals outside of the breeding sea- 
SIZ: 3d6+6 (17) Magic Points 7 

son. All boars are aggressive when threatened, usually attempting to 
DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 8m 

intimidate first, and then launch a powerful charge using the tusks 
to carve at their enemies. Sows with young will almost certainly INS: 2d6+4 (1) Initiative Bonus 11 

attempt to defend their progeny from potential attack, and males POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Bristled Hide 

can be highly territorial — especially if sows are nearby during the 
Abilities Burrower, Frenzy 

breeding season. 
Magic None 

The animals are prized for their rich meat, strong, warm hide, 

and their tusks which make excellent trophies. Boar hunting, using 
hounds to track and flush the animals, is a widespread sport through- 

1d20 Location AP/HP 
out most cultures, but a hazardous one. Large, powerful specimens 

Right Rear Leg 2/7 
can easily eviscerate unwary opponents, and whilst much of the 
challenge comes in facing these creatures with a long spear to receive Left Rear Leg 2/7 

a charge, hunter injuries and deaths are not uncommon. Hindquarters 2/8 

Some species, such as goblins and orcs, raise boar as mounts, Forequarters 2/9 

riding them into battle just as any other steed. A boar cavalry, tusks Right Front Leg 2/7 

tipped with iron or even spikes or spines, is a terrifying sight. Left Front Leg 2/7 

Head 2/7 

231

o 



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Skills 

Athletics 57%, Brawn 63%, Endurance 62%, Evade 42%, Perception 48%, Athletics 59%, Brawn 62%, Endurance 62%, Evade 56%, Locale 66%, Perception 

Willpower 32% 64%, Survival 67%, Unarmed 59%, 

Willpower 62% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Goring Grunter (Tusks) 67% Combat Style & Weapons 

Boar-Kin Warrior (Spear, Tusk, Shield) 69% 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Passions 
Tusks M S 1d6+1d4 As for Head 

Love Chaos 88%, Hate Intruders 80% 

BoAarr--KIinN Weapon Size /Force Reach Damage 

Boar-headed humans akin to minotaurs, boar-kin are a product Shortspear M L 1d8+1+1d4 4/5 

of the gods of chaos. Powerful, aggressive, forest-dwelling individu- 
Tusks M T 1d4+1d4 As for Head 

als, they are as attuned to their environment as are their four-legged 
relatives, and may even lead packs of wild boar acting as their lead- Peltast Shield L S 1d4+1d4 4/12 

ers. Boar-Kin are equipped with the ferocious tusks of their ani- 
mal cousins, and find socialization with humankind difficult. They 

BoNnAaCcoONn 
have simple psychologies: defend their territory and their lives, and 

This herbivorous four legged beast has the body of a bull and 
procreate their species. For this latter goal, humans may be actively 

the head of a horse, the head equipped with oversized sharp, curling 
stalked, seized, and kept prisoner deep in the boar-kin’s forest lair. 

horns. Bonacon can be tamed and used as mounts, but capturing 
Boar-Kin, like their four-legged brethren, are largely noctur- 

these beasts in the wild is hazardous as bonacon are naturally fierce 
nal. They are burrow dwellers (like their kin), and may have a large 

and antagonistic, taking exception to most intruders. If forced to 
underground lair consisting of a tunnels and chambers beneath the 

back down, the bonacon flees, expelling a trail of excrement behind 
forest floor. 

it which is spread by its revolving hairy tail. 
Boar-Kin, if needing a mate, will always try to incapacitate 

This strange behaviour has a second peculiarity. Its faeces are 
rather than kill so that a potential victim can be captured. Typically 

poisonous, a result of complex digestive processes that create a pun- 
boar-kin use their spears, relying only on tusks when in close prox- 

gent, agony and asphyxia-inducing residue inherent in its pellets. 
imity to their targets. If a boar-kin successfully gouges with its tusks 

Contact between bonacon faeces and exposed flesh results in, first, 
roll 1d10+10 for the Hit Location to reflect the upper parts of the 

itching and then an intense burning sensation. Shortness of breath 
body likely to be targeted by the attack. 

follows as the lungs begin to fail, and then the possibility of death as 
airways close. One pellet — about the size of a fist — can be used to 

Boar-Kin Attributes 
coat the blade of a Medium sized weapon to create a natural blade 

STR: 2d6+9 (16) Action Points 3 
venom. 

CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier — +1d4 

Bonacon Attributes 
SIZ: 2d6+9 (16) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 6m STR: 2d6+12(19) Action Points 2 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 13 CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 

SIZ: 4d6+12 (26) Magic Points 7 
POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Bristled Hide 

DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 10m 
CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities Burrower, Chaos Tainted (if 

INS: 2d6+4 (11) Initiative Bonus 12 
a product of Chaos), Frenzy, 

Intimidate POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Tough Hide 

Magic Tolk Magic 56% (Befuddle, Abilities Trample, Venomous (facces) 

Coordination, Firearrow) 
Magic None 

1d20 Location AP/HP 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Right Leg 1/7 
1-3 Right Rear Leg 2/9 

46 Left Leg 1/7 
4-6 Left Rear Leg 2/9 

79 Abdomen 1/8 
79 Hindquarters 2/10 

10-12 Chest 1/9 
10-12 Forequarters 2/11 

13-15 Right Arm 1/6 
13-15 Right Front Leg 2/9 

16-18 Left Arm 1/6 
16-18 Left Front Leg 2/9 

19-20 Head 1/7 
19-20 Head 2/9 

232



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Skills CEeNnTtaAuURr CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 
Athletics 62%, Brawn 65%, Endurance 62%, Evade 46%, Perception 38%, Centaurs can certainly be used as player characters although 

Willpower 34% their physiology and general nature may prove to be a challenge in 
some situations. 

Combat Style & Weapons CUuLlTtUuRrEe 
The Centaur culture is roughly equivalent to Barbarian, even 

Gore and Gouge (Horns) 72% 
though they do not build fixed settlements, and study many cerebral 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage arts. The herd is a cohesive social group with strong traditions and 

Horns M S 1d10+1d8 As for Head principles. Naturally herds display the same range of characteris- 
tics as any society and, although centaurs are, by and large, passive 

Trample H S 2d8 As for Leg 
there are herds that enjoy war, raiding and challenging those around 
them. Indeed, some of the examples found in the Combat chapter 

The facces of a bonacon have a Potency of 70 with itching 
show the more aggressive side to the centaur culture. 

beginning after 1d4 Combat Rounds. A further Endurance roll 
against the potency is required after one hour as the affected area & Customs+40%, Native Tongue+40% 
is subject to the Agony condition (see page 75). After another 1d3 & Standard Skills: Athletics, Brawn, Endurance, First Aid, 
hours a further Endurance roll, this time at one grade lower, must Insight, Locale, Perception 
be made to avoid incurring 1d3 levels of Fatigue owing to shortness & Example Combat Styles: Centaur Warrior, Centaur Berserker 
of breath. 1d3 hours later the airways start to fail resulting in death & Professional Skills: Courtesy, Craft (any), Healing, Language 
in CON minutes if some form of poison cure cannot be found. If at (any), Lore (any), Musicianship, Teach, Track 
any stage the victim succeeds in resisting the poison then all further 
effects are ignored. 

Minotaurs (see page 258) are immune to the bonacon’s toxic 
faeces. Some tribes herd bonacon and collect the excrement to be 
used as ammunition for slings or simply to hurl at those who have 
displeased them. 

CEeNnTtaAuURr 
The classical centaur is a magical cross between human 

and equine forms: the upper body of a human replacing the 
horse’s head and neck. However other centaur forms are pos- 
sible: elf; goblin or orc centaurs, for instance. 

Centaurs are noted for their intelligence, and often act 
as teachers, and tutors. They are social and herds of 
centaurs form their own societies based on either a 
barbarian or nomadic culture rather than a civilised 
one — although centaurs display many cultural 
qualities equating to civilised societies, they can 
also become wild and bestial, especially when 
drunk. 

It is common for centaurs to form friendship 
bonds with an individual or a group of individuals, 
but their loyalties will always be, first and foremost, 
to their own herd. Centaurs mate with their own 
kind and cannot mate with humans, but they have 
human emotions, and so romantic liaisons are not 
unknown. 

Centaurs can study and practice magic just as 
humans can. Any magical style is open to them, and 
the style favoured depends entirely on the social, 
cultural and religious practices of the centaur herd. 

Note: The centaur’s anatomy means that the 
Damage Modifier and Hit Points for its upper half 
are figured using STR x2 and CON x2. 

233



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy 
Centaur Attributes 

Centaur characters begin the game with goods and currency 
STR: 3d6+6 (17) Action Points 2 

worth 4d6 x60 silver pieces. 
CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier ~ +1d4 (+1d10 when 

Trampling) ThHe CEeNnTtaAuURr VOoIiCcEe 
SIZ: 3d6+18 (29) Magic Points 16 ‘Our herd rules these pastures butyou arefree to pass through as long as you 
DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 12m do not approach our mares andf oals, and remember that honour should prevail. 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 12 Indeed, we know many from your city, and I had the privilege of acting as tutor 
lo one ofy our noblemen: perhapsyou have heard of am? No? Ah, well... not all 

POW: 2d6+9 (16) Armour Hide on equine parts. Any 
are destinedfor great things. 

armour for their human 
We are cautious because there have been raids by the two-legged beastmen 

locations and barding for the 

equine locations. of Chaos recently. Only last season our warriors had to drive-away a raiding 
party intent on spreading disease. One of our mares was captured a year ago and 

CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Trample 
Joaled a terrible monstrosity so it is our duty to wipe out their pestilence. We will 

Magic Specialists may follow any 
keep them from reaching your city if we can — even if that costs centaur lves. 

magical tradition. 
We fear chaos but will stand against it because purily requires a_fight if it is lo 
be preserved. 

1d20 Location AP/HP You look weary. My cave is notf ar;, and our herd is gathering to feast thus eve. 
1-3 Right Rear Leg 1/8 If you wish you may join us, rest, and eat. There will be many stories told, and 
4-6 Left Rear Leg 1/8 competitions held. Why, tf you can use that bow you carry you might even beat 
7-8 Hindquarters 1/9 some of our archers! If not, we can show you some techniques that will improve 

9-10 Forequarters 1/10 your skill with it. The choice ts yours. If you join us you will be most welcome, 

11-12 Right Front Leg 1/8 and on the morrow I will have two of our warriors provide a guide through the 
western hills, which is where the chaos nest lurks. 

13-14 Left Front Leg 1/8 
Pass in peace, two-legged brother” 

15-16 Chest 0/7 

17 Right Arm 0/4 

18 Left Arm 0/4 CHhAaOoSs HYyBbRrIidD 
19-20 Head 0/5 These foul beings go by many regional and cultural names 

but are essentially the same thing: a chaos-warped combination 
of human and animal (goat, sheep, and antelope) that frequently 
carries disease, and lives only to reproduce, spread its diseases, and 

Athletics 58%, Brawn 70%, Endurance 52%, Evade 62%, Insight 59%, Locale 
bring havoc and suffering to the untainted. 

66%, Lore (Various) 66%, Musicianship 62%, Perception 49%, Teach 64%, 
Chaos Hybrids have their own, loosely-knit, primitive cultures 

Unarmed 58%, Willpower 62% 
based on strength and cruelty. A leader of a pack (known as a Mur- 
der) is always the strongest, fiercest, and most ruthless of the bunch, 

Combat Style & Weapons 
having secured his place through slaughtering any challengers. 

Centaur Warrior (Spear, Shield, Short Bow) 68% 
Given this mind-set and philosophy it is therefore unsurprising to 
find that Chaos Hybrids have utter contempt for all other sapient 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 
races seeing them as prey, a means to spread their contagion and to 

Shortspear M L 1d8+1+1d4 4/5 breed with. 

Peltast Shield L S 1d4+1d4 4/12 The creatures worship the gods associated with their atrocities: 
those of murder, chaos, disease and blight. Most other sapient cul- 

Short Bow L - 1d6+1d4 4/4 tures shun them at best, and hunt them down with a view to exter- 

Hooves L M 1d6+1d4 As for Leg mination at worst. 
Chaos Hybrids have a chance equal to their Willpower of being 

Trample H M 2d10 As for Leg 
cursed (or blessed) with 1d3 Chaotic Features. They are also adept 
magicians, and most Hybrids can be expected to have a number of 

CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 
Folk Magic spells equal to their CHA. Each pack has at least one 

& Loyalty to Herd priest or shaman with access to the relevant magic. 

& Love (Person, Alcohol, Learning, Women) Note that some hybrids are born with sub-sapient intellects which 

& Hate (Ignorance, Predators, and so on). may cause them to act as little more than mentally impaired beasts. 
A Chaos Hybrid carries a disease (see the disease table below) 

which can be caught through close proximity to the creature (i.e., 
PRrOoFfEeSsSsIioOnNSs 

close combat engagement distances). Chaos Hybrid corpses remain 
Craftsman, Herder, Hunter, Physician, Priest, Scholar, Scout, 

contagious unless burned. The potency of the disease is always 
Shaman, Warrior 

equal to the Chaos Hybrid’s Endurance. 
The diseases in the tableare the most common, but Chaos 

Hybrids have many dreadful contagions, especially those who 

234



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Passions 

Love Chaos 88%, Hate Everyone 80% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Hybrid Ravager (Spear, Club, Shield) 64% 

Weapon Size/ Force Reach Damage 

Club M S 1d6+1d2 4/4 

Shortspear M L 1d8+1+1d2 4/5 

Horns M S 1d4+1d2 As for Head 

Target Shield M S 1d4+1d2 4/9 

CHhAaOoss HYyBbRrIidD DIiSsEeAaSsEeSs 

1d6 Disease Symptoms and Effects 

1 point of INT is lost every week until the 

disease is cured. The victim feels sleepy and 
Mind Rot 

indolent, the condition worsening with each 

point of INT lost. 

Suppurating boils begin in a random 

location and spread to an adjacent location 

each week until cured. The boils hiss and 
burst easily leaving horrible welts in their 

Seeping Pox wake. The affected location cannot be 
covered whilst afflicted and sustains 1 Hit 

worship the spirits and gods of disease. Hybrid shaman go out of Point of damage after infection. 1d3 points 

their way to locate virulent disease spirits in the Spirit World, bring- of CHA is lost when the disease reaches the 
Head. 

ing them back to deliberately infect an entire tribe. 
The victim is wracked by shivers that 

Chaos Hybrid Attributes no degree of heat can alleviate. He 
Creeping Chills 

STR: 2d6+6 (13) Action Points 2 automatically gains 1d3 levels of Fatigue 

which remains until the disease is cured. 
CON: 1d6+12 (16) Damage Modifier ~ +1d2 

Whenever strenuous activity is entered the 
SIZ: 2d6+6 (13) Magic Points 11 

victim must make an Endurance roll. If 
DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 8m 

failed he is subjected to a fit of dreadful, 
INT: 3d6 (11) Initiative Bonus 11 Gagging Cough 

painful coughing that continues for 1d6 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Tough Hide minutes. During this time he is unable to do 
anything save cough and wretch. 

CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities Chaos Tainted, Disease 

Immunity The victim breaks out in a scarlet rash that 

covers the entire body. 1 point of CON is 
Magic Tolk Magic 48%; Specialists 

have either Devotion 58% & Red Plague lost every day through vomiting, diarrhoea 

Exhort 58%, or Binding 58% and dehydration. When CON reaches zero 

& Trance 57% the victim dies. 

The victim is subject to violent headaches 

1d20 Location AP/HP and suffers mild hallucinations whenever 

they make a skill check which results in a 
1-3 Right Leg 1/7 

roll of 96+. However, he also descends into 
4-6 Left Leg 1/7 Madness Blight 

insanity becoming paranoid, schizophrenic, 
79 Abdomen 1/8 subject to violent rages and, after a number 
10-12 Chest 1/9 of days equal to his POW, irreparably 

13-15 Right Arm 1/6 insane. 

16-18 Left Arm 1/6 

19-20 Head 1/7 

Skills 

Athletics 44%, Brawn 46%, Endurance 62%, Evade 42%, Locale 52%, Perception 

62%, Survival 67%, Unarmed 54%, Willpower 52% 

235



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

CHhIimMEeRraA Combat Style & Weapons 

The Chimera of mythology has the head and body of a lion Chimeric Chaos (Serpent Head, Goat Head, Lion Head, Claws) 75% 

(or lioness) with a serpent for a tail, and the head of a goat emerg- 
Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

ing from the mid-part of the beast’s spine. The serpent is poisonous 
(treat as cobra venom on page 76), and the goat can breathe fire, Serpent Tail M L 1d4+Poison As for Tail 

whilst the lion’s head snarls and rages. Clearly a product of magic 
Goat Head L L 1d10+Fire As for Head 

and perhaps Chaos, the chimera is a fearsome monster able to han- 
dle multiple foes simultancously. The breath weapon of the goat’s Lion Head L T 1d6+1d* As for Head 

head makes it difficult to get close to the creature, and only magical Claws L M 1d6+1d8 As for Leg 

or enchanted weapons inflict normal damage. 
Chimera are generally encountered singly, and as guardians of 

some kind — although some individuals may wander, bringing fear CrrAaBb,, GIiaAnNTt 
and destruction to those areas they decide to stalk. They are pos- Gigantic versions of the familiar marine crustaceans, these crabs 

sessed of a ravenous hunger, devouring any fresh meat that happens can be found in both oceanic and land-based variants although, in 

across their path. In some myth variants the chimera is depicted as the latter case, large bodies of nearby water are favoured. 

having the head of a fire-breathing lion with the horns of a goat. If Giant crabs are capable of burrowing although they tend to 

using such a variation, then remember that the horns can be used as remain close to the surface rather than creating deep and lengthy 

a highly effective impaling weapon. excavations. 

Killing a chimera can be achieved through decapitating the lion All crabs benefit from the natural armour of their carapace, 

head; killing the serpent or goat heads only serves to deprive the but the giant species of the familiar crustacean takes exceptional 

monster of those attacks. The creature can split its attacks easily advantage. They possess one oversized claw which grants them a 

against separate enemies, assuming they are within range. distinctive appearance. The giant crab behaves in very much the 
same way as its smaller cousins, with its sideways scuttle, and its 
aquatic life style (although land crabs can also be encountered in 
jungle environments). 

Chimera Attributes 
Giant crabs are able to parry with either claw making them for- 

STR: 2d6+12 (19) Action Points 5 (multiheaded) 
midable opponents in combat. Both claws are able to Grip and Sun- 

CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 der. The secondary claw is usually used for parrying blows whilst the 
SIZ: 2d6+18 (25) Magic Points 13 main claw is used to deliver them. 
DEX: 2d6+9 (16) Movement 10m 

INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 15 Crab, Giant Attributes 

STR: 2d6+12(19) Action Points 3 
POW: 2d6+6 (13) Armour Mane and Hide 

CON: 3d6+6 (17) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 
Abilities Breathe Flame, Immunity 

(Mundane weapons), Multi- SIZ: 4d6+12 (26) Magic Points 4 

headed, Venomous DEX: 3d6+6 (17) Movement 6m 

Magic None INS: 2d6+2 (9) Initiative Bonus 13 

POW: 1d6 (4) Armour Carapace 

1d20 Location API/HP 
Abilities Burrowing, Formidable 

1-2 Serpent Tail 1/7 Natural Weapons 

3-4 Right Rear Leg 1/8 Magic None 

5-6 Left Rear Leg 1/8 

7-8 Hindquarters 1/9 1d20 Location AP/HP 

9-10 Goat Head 1/8 1 Right Fourth Leg 8/8 

11-14 Forequarters 1/10 2 Left Fourth Leg 8/8 

15-16 Right Front Leg 1/8 3 Right Third Leg 8/8 

17-18 Left Front Leg 1/8 4 Left Third Leg 8/8 

19-20 Lion Head 2/8 5 Right Second Leg 8/8 

6 Left Second Leg 8/8 

7 Right First Leg 8/8 

8 Left First Leg 8/8 
Athletics 55%, Brawn 68%, Endurance 66%, Evade 62%, Perception 56%, 

Willpower 66% 9-10 Abdomen 8/10 

11-16 Cephalothorax 8/11 

17-18 Right Pincer 8/11 

19-20 Left Pincer 8/9 

236



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Skills 

Athletics 56%, Brawn 75%, Endurance 64%, Evade 54%, Perception 43%, Athletics 47%, Brawn 99%, Endurance 78%, Evade 32%, Perception 49%, Swim 

Willpower 38% 80% Willpower 44% 

Combat Style & Weapons Combat Style & Weapons 

Crushing Crustacean (Pincers) 76% Lurking Death (Jaws, Tail Sweep) 67% 

Weapon Size/ Force Reach Damage Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

As for Righ 
Primary Pincer H L 1d8+1d8 s or g ¢ Jaws H M 1d10+2d6 As for Head 

Pincer 

As for Left Tail H L 1d8+2d6 As for Tail 
Sccondary L M 1d8+1d8 
Pincer Pincer 

CycLlops 
CRrOoCcOoDdILilEe/ALlLlIigGaAtToOrR Greek legend refers to two quite distinct races bearing the same 

Crocodiles and alligators infest tropical and sub-tropical swamps name. For MyTHRas, Cyclopes are a race of single-eyed giants with 
and rivers where they feed on any form of live prey. Their camou- a taste for flesh of any kind, and a natural skill for metallurgy and 
flage is perfect for their environment, and by remaining perfectly constructing fortifications. 
still under the surface of murky water the creature can easily go The single eye of the Cyclops is found in the centre of the crea- 
unnoticed. They have little problem tackling prey much larger than ture’s forehead, above the hooked nose. Above the eye is a horn 
themselves using ambush tactics to lunge out from cover, seize the which is the source of magical power for the Cyclops. A typical 
prey, drag it into the water, then drown it. Despite their size and Clyclops stands around three times the height of a man. Its lower 
bulk, crocodiles are surprisingly fast and agile, albeit only maintain- body is goat-like, and covered in rough, shaggy wool terminating in 
ing this for short periods. cloven hoofs. 

Crocodiles always choose Grip when a Special Effect has been Cyclopes live in isolated areas where they herd livestock (which 
generated, and hold on for as long as possible, using Brawn and Ath- are eaten raw), and manufacture metal goods in their subterranean 
letics to take the prey into the water where it is submerged and held forges often located in volcanoes or in caves near the sea. These 
there, with the creature spinning around and around to facilitate goods are sold to those who manage to establish a relationship with 
both drowning and damage. Spinning does not inflict any additional the creatures, and Cyclopes are capable of forging exquisite weap- 
damage, butit makes attempts to break free from the grip two grades ons, armour, tools and jewellery. 
more difficult. Whilst submerged victims are subject to the Drown- A surly and bad tempered race, Cyclopes are quick to anger, 
ing rules (see page 71). and even those who have formed something 

Prehistoric crocodiles can grow far, far larger. 'To represent some- approaching a friendship 
thing like a Deinosuchus add +12 to STR, +24 to SIZ and double have been attacked 
its Armour Points. with  huge rocks, 

tree-trunk clubs or 
Crocodile/Alligator Attributes the forging ham- 
STR: 2d6+24 (31) Action Points 3 mers the Cyclo- 

CON: 2d6+12 (19) Damage Modifier ~ +2d6 pes  occasionally 

SIZ: 4d6+24 (38) Magic Points 7 carry. The most 
J unfortunate— and 

DEX: 2d6+9 (16) Movement 6m 
j this includes any- 

INS: 2d6+5 (12) Initiative Bonus 13 
, one who steal their 

POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Thick Scales livestock — are eaten. 

Abilities Camouflaged, Cold Blooded They are prone to 
throwing 

Magic None 

1d20 Location API/HP 

1-3 Tail 5/12 

4-5 Right Hind Leg 5/12 

6-7 Left Hind Leg 5/12 

8-10 Hindquarters 5/13 

11-14 Torequarters 5/14 

15-16 Right Front Leg 5/12 

17-18 Left Front Leg 5/12 

19-20 Head 5/13 

237



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

boulders at tresspassers or even passing ships using their Athletics to 
DRraRAgGoOnN 

aim the huge rocks. 
The most iconic, dreaded, and revered of legendary creatures, 

Ciyclopes are capable of using Folk Magic, and the horn above 
dragons are immense, winged, fire-breathing reptiles of great intel- 

their single eye acts as a Folk Magic focus. If taken from a freshly 
ligence — and, sometimes, wisdom — which are found represented 

killed Cyclops it contains the remaining Magic Points of the living 
in most cultures and mythologies. Sometimes they are brute killers, 

creature, which can be used to power Folk Magic spells cast by the 
preying on the helpless; sometimes they are solitary hoarders guard- 

owner. The capacity of the horn deteriorates over time — one Magic 
ing huge stashes of treasure; and at other times are wise mystics 

Point is lost every year until the horn becomes useless — but until 
that seem capable of guiding others as well as preying upon them. 

then, the Magic Points contained in the horn replenish at the same 
Dragons are fully sapient although their intelligence is fundamen- 

rate as its owner. 
tally alien to human psychology meaning that their actions, whilst 

If a Cyclops is hit in the head, no matter how much damage is 
appearing bestial, are driven by their own, peculiar, motivations and 

sustained, it must make an Endurance roll opposed by the attacker’s 
desires. 

combat roll. If the Cyclops fails in the roll it has been struck in the 
Dragons can talk. They have their own language (Draconic), 

eye, and all physical skills immediately become one grade harder. If 
and may be capable of either speaking other languages or converse 

it loses with a FFumble, it is rendered completely blind with all skills 
mentally, bypassing the need for individual languages. However 

becoming three grades harder. 
they communicate their dominating personality constantly seeks to 
ensnare or trick those that listen to its seductive words. They are 

Cyclops Attributes also capable of using magic: Tolk Magic certainly, and possibly 
STR: 2d6+24 (31) Action Points 2 higher forms such as sorcery. The choice of magic any dragon uses 
CON: 2d6+18 (25) Damage Modifier ~ +2d6 is dependent on the campaign, and the way the dragon is used. 

SIZ: 4d6+24 (38) Magic Points 13 Essentially solitary beings, dragons do mate and produce eggs, 

DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 10m which are closely and severely guarded. Reproducing is likely a long 
and difficult business given the relative rarity of these beasts. Usu- 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 12 
ally though, dragons are encountered as individuals, and extremely 

POW: 2d6+6 (13) Armour Skin & Fur (lower body) 
potent, dangerous at ones at that. A mature or old dragon is capa- 

CHA: 1d6 (4) Abilities Immunity (Fire) ble of handling scores of foes single-handedly although, as with any 

Magic Tolk Magic 65% (Bludgeon, creature, they do have their weaknesses, and may be prone to a lucky 

Iron Hand) strike that brings them crashing down. 
The dragon characteristics provided here are for a young beast, 

1d20 Location API/HP and one that uses Folk Magic to augment its natural capabilities. 

1-3 Right Leg 4/13 Older specimens should have their skills, physical characteristics, 
and natural protection augmented to reflect increasing age and 

4-6 Left Leg 4/13 
experience. Also note that this is a classic western dragon. Drag- 

7-9 Abdomen 4/14 
ons found in eastern mythologies often lack wings (yet still fly), are 

10-12 Chest 2/15 
more serpentine in appearance, and frequently have leonine features 

13-15 Right Arm 2/12 rather than reptilian. The same statistics can be used, but different 
16-18 Left Arm 2/12 Hit Locations may be required. 
19-20 Head 2/13 A dragon’s tail sweep can hit multiple foes, its Attack roll being 

simultaneously applied to everyone within reach on its rear or flank. 
Skills The fire breathed by a dragon stretches in a cone for a number 

Athletics 62%, Brawn 109%, Craft (Smithing) 64%, Endurance 80%, Evade 42%, of metres in length equal to the dragon’s CON, and a number of 

Locale 56%, Lore (Husbandry) 66%, Perception 56%, Unarmed 72%, Willpower metres wide equal to a quarter of CON. Anything caught in the 

66% blast ignites if flammable, and the heat is powerful enough to melt 
unenchanted metals. Repeatedly using the breath weapon within a 

Passions short period is exhausting though. If breathing fire more than once 
Resent Intruders 80%, Love Treasure and Metalwork 85% an hour, the dragon must make an Endurance roll with each roll 

after the first becoming one grade harder. Failing the Endurance roll 
Combat Style & Weapons gives the dragon one level of fatigue. Dragons therefore reserve their 
Huge Blunt Object (Hammer, Club) 82% fire for only those occasions where it is absolutely necessary. 

The classic dragon covets wealth, collecting and hoarding it in 
Weapon Size/ Force Reach Damage 

underground lairs and caverns. Not all dragons are so avaricious, 
Torge Hammer E VL 1d10+3+2d6 6/325 but there is no doubting their love for gold, jewels, and finely made 

things. They can be arrogant and vain, too, displaying obvious con- 
Immense Club C U 2d8+2d6 4/270 

tempt for anything smaller, less long-lived, and less intelligent. As 
Thrown Boulder E - 4d6 4/- with any intelligent creature though, dragons exhibit ahuge range of 

Stomp H L 1d8+2d6 As for Leg personality types and, despite their great power, many are friendly 
- or, at least not prone to violence - towards humans and other such 
species. 

238



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Dragg on Attributes DWwwAaRrFf 
STR: 2d6+24 (31) Action Points 4 Diminutive, subterranean humanoids that often have a propen- 

CON: 2d6+24 (31) Damage Modifier ~ +2d8 sity for mining and metallurgy, with an accompanying love for trea- 

SIZ: 4d6+36 (50) Magic Points 19 sure, and all things material. The classic view of dwarves is that 
of a stocky, bearded, gruft species that have no love for elves, and 

DEX: 2d6+12(19) Movement 12m, 18m (Flying) 
are often portrayed as greedy, calculating and mischievous. That 

INT: 2d6+12 (19) Initiative Bonus 19 
dwarves are short is a given, but most cultures and mythologies have 

POW: 2d6+12 (19) Armour Thick Scales a diminutive species of some kind, and the more materialistic side of 
CHA: 2d6+12 (19) Abilities Breathe Flame, Cold their nature is not ubiquitous. 

Blooded, Dark Sight, Diving Some dwarves are attuned with nature and earth in similar ways 
Strike, Engulfing, Flying, that elves are with the forests. It is probably fair to say that, just 
Formidable Natural Weapons, like humans, there are numerous dwarven races, all related, with a 
Immunity (Fire), Terrifying, myriad of different cultures. The things they have in common are 
Trample a squat, heavily-set stature, a preference for an underground exis- 

Magic: Folk Magic 78% (Avert, Befuddle, Cleanse, Coordination, Curse, tence, and certain natural enemies (subterranean predators such as 
Fangsharp, Find Treasure, Glamour, Heal, Mindspeech, Spiritshield, Vigour, trolls, for example). Beyond that, cultural dynamics are as diverse as 
Witchsight) human societies, although clearly adapted to a life in the tunnels and 

caverns, and where the natural hazards are very different to those 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

above ground. 
1-2 Tail 8/17 Dwarves are naturally suspicious of anyone espousing a different 
3-4 Right Hind Leg 8/17 way of life to their own, but not necessarily antagonistic towards 
5-6 Left Hind Leg 8/17 them. Living underground means learning to deal with rocks and 

7-8 Hindquarters 8/18 minerals which results in a capability for mining and metallurgy, but 

910 Right Wing 8/16 
11-12 Left Wing 8/16 

13-14 Forequarters 8/19 

15-16 Right Front Leg 8/17 

17-18 Left Front Leg 8/17 

19-20 Head 8/17 

Skills 

Athletics 80%, Brawn 120%, Deceit 78%, Endurance 

92%, Evade 68%, Fly 90%, Insight 78%, Locale 68%, 

Lore (Dragon) 68%, Perception 78%, Teach 58%, 

Willpower 78% 

Passions 

Covet Treasure 99%, Disdain Lesser Creatures 90%, 

Abhor Weakness 80%, Love Intrigues 84% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Death and Destruction (Bite, Claws, Tail Sweep) 90%, 

Flame Breath 80% 

Weapon  Size/Force Reach Damag 

Bite E L 1d12+2d8 As for Head 

Claws E L 1d10+2d8 As for Leg 

Tail E VL 1d10+2d8 As for Tail 

Flame . 
Breath Special 4d6 - 

Trample C T 4d8 - 



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

this is by no means a ubiquitous practice. However, given such an CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSssIioOnNSs 
insular environment most dwarves are wary, reticent, and probably 
suspicious where outsiders are concerned. & Loyalty to Clan 

Strong sunlight is not something they are used to, and many & Love (Something Materialistic) 

dwarves find that bright, natural light makes them feel sluggish and & Hate (Either Trolls, Elves or some other race that bears your 

fatigued. They are, though, generally resilient to cold temperatures, clan enmity) 

and can function with greater ease in the dark, winter months than 
in the warm, summer ones. 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsIioOnNSs 
The characteristics given here are for a typical dwarf from west- Alchemist, Crafter, Entertainer, Herder, Merchant, Miner, Offi- 

ern (and more specifically, Norse) myth. They are base characteris- cial, Physician, Priest, Scholar, Scout, Sorcerer, Thief, Warrior 
tics, and standard for all dwarf species but cultures and, therefore, 
skills and magic availability will vary. Whether or not dwarves have STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy 
beards, even females, is entirely up to you. Dwarven characters begin the game with commodities or cur- 

rency worth 4d6 x100 silver pieces. 
DWwAaRrVvEeNn CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

Dwarves make for good player characters. Their psychology is, ThHEe DWwAaRrVvEeNn VOoIiCcEe 
though, shaped by their environment and their physical capabilities. ‘Of rock and stone we shape the world. Of metal and gem we bend our tools. 
As indicated there are myriad species. The notes here are to help Above us the world turns, and moves from dark to light but here in the Halls 
design a typical dwarf from northern European mythology. all things stay the same, and that s how they should be. Change is unwanted 

because it brings uncertainty. Uncertainty breeds indecision, and indecision breeds 
CUuLlTtUuRrEe weakness. We dwarves are not weak. We know what to do, when to do 1, how o 

Dwarves are social creatures bonded into clans and tribes that do it, and the tools to do it with. If something needs doing we do it now. Canyou 
share the great underground halls and cities. In this respect they plough a field at might? Can you plant crops in rain? No. The Upper World limits 
most closely resemble the Barbarian culture although there are cer- what you can do, and that is why we shun it. In our Halls, we dictate the 
tain key differences. First of all, gender does not matter in dwar- pace, and the pace is for the good of the Hall. That is the only way. 
ven society: males and females share duties and respon- Our hall s the grandest. The grandfathers of our clan carved 
sibilities equally. This includes child-rearing, manual ut_from the living stone a thousandy ears ago, and each 
labour, hunting, and war. Secondly dwarves tend generation has continued the carving. What was 
to downplay the individual in favour of the once a small settlement of fifly caverns us now 
society. Dwarves know that strength comes a large city of almost a thousand. Our halls 
from numbers, and that the wants and needs are above the silver mines, and so we guard 
of the individual are always outweighed by the treasures of the earth. Trolls try to break 
the many. They are, however, collectively, through now and then, and we fight them 
an acquisitive, materialistic society, jealously with hammer, axe, and spear. They would 
guarding their discoveries and achievements. plunge us into their darkness, and eat our 
Dwarves like things and, when removed things — things we have strwved to mine and 
from the clan, a lone dwarf can become build. They shall not take us! 
selfish and individualistic very quickly, Likewise men come down 
because the overall dwarvish our passages seeking gold 
culture is absent to guide and ) and jewels. They have not 
control his baser instincts. ' the strength or wit to dig 

& Customs+40%, Native their own chambers, and so 

Tongue+40% take from ours. We fight them 

« Standard ~ Skill:  Athletics, Just like we fight the trolls. When the 

Brawn, Deceit, Endurance, First trolls and men fight, we dwarves laugh, and 

Aid, Locale, Perception Jeast because through killing each other they save 

& Example Combat Styles: Dwarven us the trouble. 

Thane, Dwarf Berserker, Mine Warrior We dwarves are as one. We are like the stone. 

& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft We are the stone.” 

(any), Engineering, Lore (any), Mecha- 
nisms, Musicianship, Oratory, Survival 

240



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

ELleEmMEeNnTtAaLl CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCcSs aAnNDd ATtTtRrIibBUuTtEeSs 
Dwarf Attributes 

STR: 2d6+9 (16) Action Points 2 Cubic . 
STR DEX INS POW HP Protection 

Metres 
CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier ~ +1d2 

1 2d6+4 1d6+2 2d6+1 1d6+3 1d6+6 1 
SIZ: 1d3+9 (11)* Magic Points 11 

2 2d6+8 1d6+4 2d6+2 1d6+6 1d6+12 1 
DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 4m 

3 2d6+12 1d6+6 2d6+3 1d6+9 1d6+18 2 
INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 12 

4 2d6+16 1d6+8 2d6+4 1d6+12  1d6+24 2 
POW: 3d6 (11) Armour No Natural. Warriors favour 

5 2d6+20  1d6+10 2d6+5 1d6+15  1d6+30 3 
heavy armour 

6 2d6+24  1d6+12 2d6+6 1d6+18  1d6+36 3 
CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Earth Sense, Night Sight 

7 2d6+28  1d6+14 2d6+7 1d6+21 1d6+42 4 
Magic Tolk Magic 42% (Bludgeon, 

8 2d6+32  1d6+16 2d6+8 1d6+24  1d6+48 4 
Light, Lock, Might, Polish, 

9 2d6+36  1d6+18 2d6+9 1d6+27  1d6+54 5 
Repair). Specialists favour 

sorcery, but any magical path 10 2d6+40  1d6+20 2d6+10 1d6+30  1d6+60 5) 

is open to them. Fach 
. +1 per two 

additional +4 +2 +1 +3 +6 
steps 

1d20 Location API/HP metre 

1-3 Right Leg 0/6 large hot fires, and undines from water or any other liquid capable 
4-6 Left Leg 0/6 of supporting its fluid form. 

7-9 Abdomen 0/7 Elementals are most commonly encountered when summoned 

10-12 Chest 0/8 by a particular magician (whether animist, sorcerer or priest), and 
put into specific service. The magician must have a sufficient volume 

13-15 Right Arm 0/5 
of its base material in which to manifest it. For ease of reference, this 

16-18 Left Arm 0/5 
is measured in terms of cubic metres. As a rule of thumb, the larger 

19-20 Head 0/6 
the elemental the more potent it is. The elementals here are mod- 
erate examples. Far more powerful elemental entities exist: sylphs 

Skills that create hurricanes; vast undines that are incarnate tidal waves; 
Athletics 47%, Brawn 66%, Craft (Metallurgy) 64%, Craft (Masonry) 64%, salmanders that, when enraged, and in concert with the Earth God, 
Clustoms 76%, Deceit 54%, Endurance 72%, Evade 42%, Insight 44%, Locale create the pyroclastic flows of an erupting volcano. 
56%, Lore (Underground) 66%, Perception 54%, Survival 47%, Unarmed 57%, Elementals are naturally immune to magic that is based on their 
Willpower 42% 

particular element. Salamanders cannot be harmed by fire spells; 
sylphs are unaffected by magical winds, and so forth. Neither can 

Combat Style & Weapons 
they be injured by mundane weapons, as their physical forms merely 

Dwarven Warrior (Axe, Hammer, Shield, Crossbow) 67% replenish material from the immediate environment, but are dis- 
rupted by magical damage providing it is of another type than their 

Size/ Force Reach Damage 
own. 

Battleaxe M M 1d6+1+1d2 4/8 
Since elementals are amorphous they lack discrete locations. 

Great Hammer H L 1d10+3+1d2 4/10 Therefore all damage it suffers is taken from its pool of general Hit 
Points, and they are immune to serious or major wounds. However, 

Viking Shield L S 1d4+1d2 4/18 
once Hit Points are reduced to zero the spirit animating the elemen- 

Crosshbow H - 1d10 4/8 tal can no longer animate its body and dissipates. One does not ‘kill’ 
an elemental though; one merely disrupts its manifestation enough 

ELleEmMEeNnTtAaLlSs to cause it to return to wherever it was summoned from. 
The one weakness of an elemental is its vulnerability to the ele- 

Elementals are physical manifestations of semi-sapient supernat- 
ural entities, related to a particular classical element, which usually ment which opposes or dominates its own. These precise relation- 

inhabit the spirit realm. With the right magic they are capable of ships depend on the campaign world, but the upshot is that the ele- 

passing into the mundane world, and assuming a physical form con- mental takes double damage from magical attacks using the element 

sisting of the substance they represent. The following descriptions which is its antithesis. 

relate to the physical manifestations. For information about Elemen- All elementals possess the traits of Engulfing, Immunity (Own 

tal Spirits see page 148. Element), and Vulnerable (Counter-Element). Furthermore they 

The five elemental types are: Gnomes (earth), , Sylphs (air), Sala- share the same fundamental characteristics and attributes: 

manders (fire), Undines (water), and Shades (darkness). Hit Points are rolled rather than calculated. Only damage 

The physical nature, and therefore the characteristics, of each inflicted by magical spells or weapons affects the elemental, so a 

type, differ by the element it is comprised of. Gnomes are corporeal sword enhanced with a Bladesharp spell would harm the elemental, 

beings of gravel, mud or sand that can, nevertheless, merge with, and but not the damage bonus of its wielder. 

pass through the ground seamlessly. Sylphs are formed from blowing Protection represents the natural resilience of an elemental to 

winds, shades from stygian darkness and shadows, salamanders from magical damage. It acts just like Armour Points against any injury 
the elemental suffers. 

241



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

AVvEeRrAaGgEe ELleEmMEeNnTtAaLlSs 

Cubic Metre I\Tatural Weapon Act.ion Initiative APIHP Skills 
Size and Damage Points Bonus 

1 None 2 +7 1/10 Brawn 42%, Evade 52%, Perception 45%, Willpower 64%, Combat 57% 

2 M/1d2 2 +HY) 1/16 Brawn 50%, Evade 56%, Perception 49%, Willpower 70%, Combat 63% 

3 L/1d6 2 +10 2/22 Brawn 58%, Evade 60%, Perception 53%, Willpower 76%, Combat 69% 

4 L/1d10 2 +12 2/28 Brawn 66%, Evade 64%, Perception 57%, Willpower 82%, Combat 75% 

5 H/1d12 3 +13 3/34 Brawn 74%, Evade 68%, Perception 61%, Willpower 88%, Combat 81% 

6 H/2d6 3 +15 3/40 Brawn 82%, Evade 72%, Perception 65%, Willpower 94%, Combat 87% 

7 E/2d6 3 +16 4/46 Brawn 90%, Evade 76%, Perception 69%, Willpower 100%, Combat 93% 

8 C/1d8+1d6 3 +18 4/52 Brawn 98%, Evade 80%, Perception 73%, Willpower 106%, Combat 99% 

9 C/2d8 4 +19 5/58 Brawn 106%, Evade 84%, Perception 77%, Willpower 112%, Combat 105% 

10 C/1d10+1d8 4 2F 2l 5/64 Brawn 114%, Evade 88%, Perception 81%, Willpower 118%, Combat 111% 

An elementals’ Action Points and Initiative Bonus are calcu- inflict damage by bashing foes, throwing rocks or grinding 
lated normally. Its Damage Modifier however is based upon STR them into mince if they can engulf the victim within their 
x2, rather than STR + SIZ. To calculate its natural weapon gravelly mass. 
size substitute its STR for SIZ on the table on page 9. In & Salamanders manipulate fire, augmenting 
addition, elementals gain the following skills: Brawn (STR existing blazes, spreading and directing them. They 
x2)+20, Evade (DEX x2)+40, Perception (INS+POW)+30, produce heat and light, varying the temperature and 
Willpower (POW x2)+50, and Elemental Combat Style intensity as needed. Salamanders fight with lashing 
(STR+DEX)+40. whips of fire, shooting out jets of flame or by immo- 

Elementals injure or damage targets by lating victims directly by engulfing them. 
cither striking (pounding, throwing or & Shades are capable of concentrating 
blasting from afar) or by engulfing the darkness, manipulating shadows, and creat- 
victim entirely. Both methods require ing pockets of utter blackness even in broad 
a successful attack roll and inflict daylight. They frostburn opponents with 
the elementals’ Damage Bonus. their glacial touch or freeze them solid if 
Strikes may be parried if the target they can engulf them. 
is using a shield of sufficient size & Sylphs create breezes and 
with which to block the sub- winds, augment naturally occurring 
stance directed at it, and dam- air motion, deny air if necessary 
age is applied to only a single (or redirect it), and can lift objects 
location. into the air. They inflict damage 

Engulfing attacks however by tossing or tumbling foes, 
must be evaded, else the vic- blasting them with airborne 
tim suffer the rolled damage debris or if they can engulf the 
to every location simultane- victim, tearing them limb from 
ously. Furthermore, unless limb in a vicious cyclone. 
the engulfed victim can & Undines manipulate 
escape they automatically water, whether free-flowing or standing. 
sufafreeperat of this dam- They can create currents, eddies and whirl- 
age at the start of every pools, redirect tides, lessen (or heighten) waves, 
round. Escaping requires and so forth. Undines smash enemies with 
the victim to win an opposed pummelling waves, shoot high speed jets 
test of either Acrobatics, Brawn or from afar, or engulf a victim, and crush them 

Evade against the Brawn skill of the elemental. under immense pressure. 
Fach elemental has a number of specific & Movement rates for elementals are as 

abilities corresponding with its type: follows: Gnome 6m, Salamander 8m, 
Shades 10m, Sylph 10m, Undine 

& Gnomes are capable of 
8m. 

manipulating the earth and & Worn  armour  counts 

rock: - making - tunnels, against damage from ele- 
opening pits, or caus- mental strikes, but not 
ing rockslides are against Engulfing 
effortl ess  activitii es 

attacks.. 
for a gnome. They 



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

LF CUuLlTtUuRrEe 
Elf

Elven culture is akin to civilised. Great store is placed on learning 
Elves are natives of the realm known as faerie, a plane co-exis- 

and understanding. Deeds, conduct and integrity are important, and 
tent with the mundane world yet distinct from it. Faerie is accessi- 

desired qualities amongst elves and in others. Dignified manners are 
ble through the glades, woodlands and forests that form the barri- 

expected, and loutish, uncouth behaviour viewed with disdain and 
ers between them. Elves can come and go between the two at will, 

suspicion. Most elven societies have a king or queen, and so loyalty to 
although other races may struggle to do so without an elf guide. 

the monarch is paramount. Elves have trouble understanding societ- 
Elves may even have permanent settlements that belong to neither 

ies that lack such structures, wondering how people can be properly 
one realm nor the other but exist in both simultaneously. 

ordered without a clear, royal leader to guide and represent them. 
The elves have a psychology quite different to that of other spe- 

cies. Otherworldly, wise in natural lore and magic, but often curi- 
CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 

ously naive where mundane matters or emotions are concerned. 
Elves view things through an almost childlike innocence that belies & Loyalty to King/Queen 

their long lifespan and knowledge of the magical world. Compli- & Love (Something emotional) 

cated things are both fascinating and difficult to comprehend. Elves & Hate (any enemy of grace and beauty) 

favour simplicity over complexity but are, nevertheless, a sophisti- 
cated race with their own complex society. 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsIioOnNSs 
Elves are not necessarily all-wise and benevolent. They can be 

Agent, Craftsman, Official, Physician, Priest, Shaman, Scholar, 
as cruel, vindictive, malevolent and mischievous as humans; indeed Scout, Thief, Warrior 
if angered their vengeance can be subtle and painful. When in love 
their passion consumes all else. They occupy rural and forest idylls 
but also build great and splendid cities. They lead peaceful lives but 
are ready to go to war when threatened— and can make tenacious 
and brutal warriors. 

The race tends to be taller than humankind, more 
slender and graceful (all elves have the Light body 
frame), and are distinctive with their fine bone 
structure, narrow, tapering skulls, and narrow, 

pointed ears. Eye colours vary through the 
spectrum, from the human tones through to j-‘ 
the colour of brilliant gems. Elven society is f 
frequently monarchical, and usually governed ‘ 
by a king, queen or both. The elves presented 
here are of the western, specifically Celtic folk- & 
lore. Depending on the campaign setting, the 
magic available to elves will vary as will their 
beliefs. _f 

In Anathaym’ world the elves have 
retreated to their shadowy realm, jealous and 
belligerent at mankind’s ascent. The Elf-Kings 
have long known the practices of sorcery but 
always shunned its power. Now, they see it i3 a 
unique weapon to bring about mankind’s fall. Rl 

Seducing those who covet power, like Kratos, the 
elves have brought sorcery into the hands of men, 
and now need only sit back and watch as they 
begin to abuse its power. 

ELlveEnN CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 
Elves are otherworldly. They seem remote from 

mundane events yet exhibit a comprehension of them that proves 
baffling for humans to understand. Nature is of great impor- 
tance to them, and so they take great care to preserve their 
environments although the greatest care is reserved for those 
areas where faerie is most accessible. As a long-lived species 
(elves live for many centuries) they do not accept or appreci- 
ate time in the same way as humankind, and are 
often unconscious of the passing of small time 
increments. 



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy 
Elven characters begin the game with wondrous goods and 

Athletics 52%, Brawn 47%, Customs 72%, Deceit 67%, Endurance 42%, Evade 
strange currency worth 4d6 x100 silver pieces. 

52%, Insight 69%, Locale 72%, Lore (Faerie) 62%, Perception 69%, Unarmed 

42%, Willpower 56% 
THhEe ELlvVeEnN VOoIiCcEe 

We live in the two realms. Both become one world although Faerie is always 
Combat Style & Weapons 

our ancestral home. All round is beauty, for the world s a beautiful place, and 
Elven Warrior (Sword, Spear, Shield, Bow) 62% 

even in s ugliest recesses there s something of wonder to behold. We are happiest 
though, amongst the glades and woodlands where the animals roam free, and the 

Weapon Size /Force Reach Damage 
mighty oaks remind us of the forests of Faerte, whose trees reach far into the sky. 

Longsword M L 1d8+1d2 6/12 
The spirits surround us, and we understand their presence even when we do 

not communicate with them directly. We know they are always there, watching, Long Spear L VL 1d10+1+1d2 4/10 

and so 1t behoves us to keep the sanctity of nature, preserving its ways, and taking 
Heater Shield L S 1d4+1d2 6/12 

nothing that us notf reely offered. 
Above all we valuefreedom. Freedom in all things: life, expression, meaning Long Bow H - 1d8+1d2 4/7 

To make a slave of something is to kill its spurit, and so we abhor those who 
enslave or shackle things to servitude. Yet we are all willing servants of our king GHhOoUuLl 
and queen because they bring us guidance and dignity, and do not compel us to 

Ghouls are undead creatures that feast on recently deceased 
their whims. Such compulsions are, we observe, human traits. And we have seen 

corpses and carrion. They are only created from sapient races, and 
over the millennia how humans have tried to impose their will on the world, and 

no intelligent species is immune 
have, time and again, farled. Perhaps it us the curse of a short life to have to leave 

to the vile curse that creates a 
a mark. Look aroundy ou: do you see signs of our passing? It is rarefor any elf to 

ghoul. Emaciated, blank-eyed, 
leave more than a_foolprintyetyou younger races have scarred the earth, and will 

and equipped with sharp teeth 
not lve long enough to see these scars. 

and nails, ghouls are driven by 
Yet the younger races intrigue us. Their ways are fascinating and contra- an insatiable hunger for necrotic 

dictory. Humans can be brutal and artful — sometimes logether — and they are flesh that causes them to 
driven to such extremes that one wonders why no higher purpose has yet developed frequent burial sites, bat- 
amongst them. Dwarves hide away beneath the ground, fearful of the sun, of tlefields and charnel pits 
nature, or beauty even though the things they craftfrom metal and precious gems where there is a ready 
are without compare. 

source of decompos- 
Such curious breeds, such curious peoples. Let us show you faerie and true ing meat. 

beauty. Come, walk with me.” Living flesh 
holds no attrac- 

EIf Attributes tion for them, 

STR: 3d6 (11) Action Points 3 but if forced to 
defend them- 

CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier ~ +1d2 
selves ghouls 

SIZ: 2d6+9 (16) Magic Points 16 
will attempt 

DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 6m 
to bite which, 

INT: 2d6+9 (16) Initiative Bonus 14 
if successful, 

POW: 2d6+6 (13) Armour No Natural. Warriors wear introduces the 
any armour magical curse that creates 

CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Life Sense, Night Sight a new ghoul upon the vic- 
tim’s eventual death (which 

Magic Tolk Magic 64% (Dullblade, 

Glamour, Light, Mobility, may be many years away). 

Sleep, Vigour). Specialists Once an infected victim 

favour theism, but any dies, it gives every appear- 

magical path is open to them. ance of having passed on. But, 
after 1d6+3 days it revives 
with an unholy vitality, its soul 

1d20 Location API/HP 
corrupted into an undead spirit 

1-3 Right Leg 0/6 
driven by its foul cravings. The 

4-6 Left Leg 0/6 ghoul scratches its way free of 
7-9 Abdomen 0/7 whatever burial fixture holds it, 
10-12 Chest 0/8 and then goes in search of its 
13-15 Right Arm 0/5 first meal. 

16-18 Left Arm 0/5 The only way to 

19-20 Head 0/6 ensure a ghoul will 

244



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

If a ghoul’s bite penetrates armour the victim must make an 
Ghoul Attributes 

unopposed Endurance roll to resist infection. Failing the roll means 
STR: 3d6+6 (17) Action Points 3 

the victim is infected with the spirit curse that will create a new ghoul 
CON: 3d6+3 (14) Damage Modifier ~ +1d2 upon death. A standard ghoul tactic is to grip an opponent with its 
SIZ: 2d6+6 (13) Magic Points 4 hands, and then target an area of exposed flesh. Once it has bitten 
DEX: 3d6+3 (14) Movement 6m it releases and flees, attempting to find somewhere to skulk until a 

INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 14 threat has passed, and it can resume feeding. 

POW: 1d6 (4) Armour Hardened skin. If buried in it, 

some ghouls will be wearing GIiaAnNTt 
armour. Enormous humans, giants can range in size from several metres 

Abilities Death Sense, Regeneration, tall to potentially dozens, although at the upper range they are 
Undead beyond the capability of most mortals to defeat. Their natural 

Magic None. size, and whether or not they continue to grow in height, depends 
upon the setting. The most common giants are between four and 

1d20 Location AP/HP ten metres tall. Whilst ostensibly a sapient race, a few giants are so 

1-3 Right Leg 0/6 dim-witted or ponderous of thought that they are in effect less intel- 
ligent than animals, and act accordingly. 

46 Left Leg 0/6 
Myth has it that giants are bad-tempered, sometimes desirous of 

79 Abdomen 0/7 
human flesh, and bread made of bones and generally unpleasant to 

10-12 Chest 0/8 
encounter. Some, like the fabled etten, have two heads. However, in 

13-15 Right Arm 0/5 truth, giants come in all dispositions, ranging from the nasty, through 
16-18 Left Arm 0/5 the surly to those who are genuinely friendly. Giants then, are as 
19-20 Head 0/6 diverse as their smaller cousins, and need not be ground-stomping 

man-caters. In Meerish legend the giants are the heralds of the gods. 
Myceras’ herald is a gigantic minotaur who rides a chariot the size 

Athletics 51%, Brawn 50%, Endurance 58%, Evade 48%, Perception 47%, of a galley pulled by enormous bonacon. When the giants appear, 
Unarmed 71%, Willpower 38% legends say, the gods are preparing for war. 

What is common to giant species though, is a relatively primi- 
Combat Style & Weapons tive culture. Most are solitary beings although some form complex, 
Elven Warrior (Sword, Spear, Shield, Bow) 62% barbarian or perhaps civilised societies where giants as a race are 

common (although this tends to be a rarity). Their size makes the 
Weapon Size/Torce Reach Damage 

creation of artefacts, such as weapons and armour, quite difficult 
Claws S T 1d4+1d2 As for Arm given the amount of raw materials and sheer logistics of production 

Teeth S T 1d3+1d2 As for Head difficult. As such many giants rely on natural armour and impro- 
vised weapons, such as huge branches and tree-trunks. Given their 

not rise from an infected body is to burn it as soon as possible — size, such large weapons allow for sweeping effects and, of course, 

which is one of the reasons why certain cultures cremate, rather bigger giants can stomp their foes with massive feet using their 

than bury, their dead. Trample ability. 

Lifting a ghoul’s curse can only be done through a Cure Malady When battling any giant, melee combat Hit Locations are rolled 

spell of a Magnitude greater than the POW of the ghoul which bit on 1d10 or even 1d6 indicating the difficulty (or sheer impossibility) 

them. An infected victim may not even be aware of their fate; those of reaching the upper areas of the body. Range weapon users roll 

that are, are doomed without magical intervention. Even hacking 1d20 as normal. 

off a bitten limb will not lift the curse that impregnates the soul and The example given here is for a four metre giant. For each addi- 

hibernates, waiting for death so it can be triggered. tonal 2 metres of height add +3 STR, +6 SIZ and +1 Armour 

Ghouls, being undead, are extremely difficult to destroy. As part Point. 

of their transformation their skin desiccates and hardens, granting 
them a bonus of 1 Armour Point to whatever natural protection ONnEe HEeAaDd oORr TwOo?? 
they once had. In addition the dire potency of their animating curse Some giants — commonly those_found in British myths — have two 

allows them slowly to regenerate damage. Even a dismembered heads. Each head has ils own personality and it is common_for the heads 
ghoul will eventually regrow new body parts at the rate of one Hit lo argue with each other; agreeing only that whatever us standing before the 
Point per location every week until it is complete once more. The giant 1s good enough to be stompedf lat and ground-up forf lowr. Adding an 
only sure way to kill one is with fire, which inflicts normal damage. additional head us unlikely to grant any serious combat advantage to the 

Ghoul characteristics are based upon those of the originally giant, but it does mean that severing only one head does not automatically 
infected creature. They gain +6 STR, +3 CON, +3 DEX| their kill at. Indeed, depending on the general disposition between the heads, 
INT is converted to INS and CHA is lost entirely,. POW, no matter the surviving bonce may even consuder that us enemies have just done it 
what it started with, is replaced with 1d6. The following ghoul is a_ javour. 

based on a human cadaver. - 4 

245



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Goblins are cowardly by nature: an outnumbered goblin will flee 
Giant Attributes 

or surrender. They prefer to outnumber their foes, and so will not 
STR: 2d6%15 (22 Action Foints ’ engage unless they have greater numbers (and usually hunt and raid 
CON: 2d6+12 (19) Damage Modifier ~ +1d10 in packs of 1d6+3). 

SIZ: 2d6+21 (28) Magic Points 11 The characteristics above are for a standard goblin or orc. Hob- 
DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 12m goblins have 2d6+8 STR and SIZ, but otherwise the same charac- 

INT: 3d6 (11) Initiative Bonus 11 teristics. As leaders they can be expected to have better weapons 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Thick skin and armour. 

CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Trample 

Magic Some may have Folk Magic Goblin/Orc Attributes 

e [ APIEP STR: 2d6+4 (11) Action Points 2 

13 Right Leg 3/10 CON: 3d6+3 (14) Damage Modifier ~ None 

46 Left Leg 3/10 SIZ: 2d6+4 (11) Magic Points 11 

7-9 Abdomen 3/11 DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 6m 

10-12 Chest 3/12 INT: 1d6+7 (11) Initiative Bonus 11 

13-15 Right Arm 3/9 POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Thick skin. Some wear 

16-18 Left Arm 3/9 additional, scavenged, armour 

19-20 Head 3/10 CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities Night Sight 

Magic Some may have Folk Magic 

or specialised priests and 
Skills 

. shamans 
Athletics 53%, Brawn 80%, Endurance 68%, Evade 42%, Perception 42%, 

Unarmed 63%, Willpower 42% 

Passions 

Greedy 75%, Like Beanstalks 60%, Hate Englishmen 90% ‘\“‘ 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Bash and Smash (Club, Maul, Great Club) 73%, Kick and Stomp 63% 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage P ; G S . L % 

Tree Trunk E VL 2d8+1d10 4/30 : 

Kick L M 1d6+1d10 As for Leg 

Trample L M 1d6+1d10 As for Leg 

GooBbLlIinN/OORrCc 
Stunted, twisted humanoids abound in myth and fan- 

tasy. They go by many names: goblin, hobgoblin, orc, 
and so on. They all have certain similarities; either grey or 
greenish skin, ugly to most eyes, vicious, peevish natures bent 
towards cruelty, and slow, dull-witted intellects. Goblins or orcs 
are the foot soldiers and minions of Evil Gods and their direct 
servants, perpetrators of terrible, murderous raids with sadistic, 
unpleasant fates for those unlucky enough to be captured. Larger, 
tougher goblin species are given an affix such as ‘hob’ (as in hob- 
goblin) or ‘dai’ (as in dai-bakemono, the Japanese name for such 
creatures) which means great, terrible or tough. 

Goblins dislike the light, and make their homes beneath ground 
where they may well be natural enemies of dwarves. Their societies 
are crude — not much above the primitive— and they prefer to steal 
rather than create, making raids on communities where weapons, 
armour, food, and other commodities they want are found in abun- 
dance. Goblins are sly and pernicious; they cannot be trusted, and 
they even dislike and distrust their own kind. 

246



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

1d20 Location API/HP warning or hide their features so as to enter into discourse with those 
they need rather than killing them outright. 

1-3 Right Leg 1/5 
The primary means of offense is the Gaze attack, which the gor- 

4-6 Left Leg 1/5 
gon must activate on its turn at the cost of 1 Magic Point. Any mortal 

7-9 Abdomen 1/6 
creature looking in the direction of the gorgon, who can potentially 

10-12 Chest 1/7 
see its face, must make an opposed roll of its Willpower versus the 

13-15 Right Arm 1/4 gorgon’s. If the gorgon wins the victim meets its gaze and is petri- 
16-18 Left Arm 1/4 fied completely, resulting in instant death. If gorgon loses, the victim 
1920 Head 1/5 manages to avert its eyes before the petrifaction can take effect. 

In some Greek iconography the gorgons are depicted as winged 
women with broad round heads, serpentine hair, the tusks of boars, 

Athletics 52%, Brawn 42%, Deceit 57%, Endurance 48%, Evade 62%, Perception lolling tongues, flared nostrils, and sometimes short coarse beards. 
61%, Unarmed 52%, Willpower 42% Clearly they were dreadful demons and Games Masters are encour- 

aged to make their gorgons as grotesque and terrible as needed. 
They need not follow the serpentine form shown in this example 

Passions 
and, indeed, may also possess wings. 

Hate the Light 90%, Hate Non-Goblins 95%, Love Hurting Things 80% 

FiIgGhHTtIinNgG Aa GOoRrGgOoNn 
Combat Style & Weapons Risking a gorgon’s gaze directly is stupid and dangerous. How- 
Goblin Warrior (Shortsword, Shield, Spear, Sling) 62% ever looking at the creature in reflection poses no risk of petrifaction. 

Those who are determined to slay a gorgon then, should use a mir- 
Weapon Size /Force Reach Damage 

ror or the interior of a metal shield, polished to provide a mirror-like 
Shortsword M S 1d6 6/8 surface. Fighting using reflection reduces the hero’s combat style by 

Shortspear M L 1d8+1 4/5 two difficulty grades. Another alternative is to fight blindfold or with 
the eyes obscured. In this case, the combat style is reduced by three 

Target Shield L S 1d4 4/9 
grades... 

Anyone surviving long enough 

GOoRrGgOoNn to enter close combat with a 

In Greek myth the gorgons were sisters cursed to immortality, gorgon must deal with the 

and a hideousness that turned mortals to stone instantly. Descrip- snake hair as well as the 

tions of these creatures vary, but MYTHRAS gorgons are mortal monster’s tail and tal- 

demons with the lower half of immense serpents, and the upper ons. The snakes attack 

body of a woman. The face of a gorgon is truly hideous for mortals as one entity, striking 

to gaze upon, and catching sight of an unreflected gorgon’s visage at Short reach. The 

petrifies living tissue as described below. In place of hair, living, individual fangs are 

writhing snakes frame the gorgon’s deadly face, and their too small to 

fingers terminate in claws of razor-sharp iron. 
Such is the deadliness of a gorgon that these monsters 

must remain isolated from contact with the outside world. 
Temples, tombs and catacombs are their favoured retreats 
with those who worship them placing offerings of meat and 
drink at the very outer reaches of the lair before retreating 
swiftly. The unlucky souls who, out of curiosity, remained to 
see if the rumours were true stand as stone guardians, fea- 
tures twisted in cruel realization. 

Despite their divine or infernal origin gorgons are vul- 
nerable to mortal weapons. Their blood howeveris a deadly 
poison, so coming into contact with the ichor, whether 
being caught in a spray of blood (such as from a Bleed 
special effect) or when cleaning a blade used to wound the 
monster, forces the victim to resist its venomous touch. 

Whilst having a monstrous nature and appearance, 
gorgons are not necessarily evil-doers. Victims of circum- 
stance, their tempers have certainly been warped into mur- 
derous anger, but gorgons are intelligent, and from time to 
time use their beautiful voices to seduce servants who can 
walk abroad and do their bidding. Gorgons may give fair 



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

inflict significant damage, but on a successful bite against an unpro- 
GRrIiFfFfiInN/HIiPpPpOoGgRrIiFfFf 

tected foe (or by use of the Inject Venom special effect) the gorgon 
Several spellings describe the same creature: griffon, gryphon, 

will inject a venom with a potency equivalent to the gorgon’s Endur- 
and the one used here. A combination of the head, forequarters and 

ance. The poison acts on the Combat Round after introduction par- 
wings of a giant eagle, with the hindquarters of a lion. Griffins are 

alysing the affected area. Paralysis of the abdomen means both legs 
tenacious airborne predators that make their eyries in high places 

stop working. Paralysis of the chest or head leads to death within a 
and prey on livestock up to and including horses. Although not 

number of turns equal to the victim’s CON as organs begin to fail. 
known for fixating on humans, attacks are not unknown especially 

The gaze attack of a gorgon head remains effective even after a 
if one wanders, mounted or on foot, into a griffin’s hunting territory 

gorgon’s death, the Willpower of the monster being equivalent to 
(which can span many kilometres from an eyrie. 

its living form. Using a head in this manner however can be very 
Griffins are fast and clever, employing dive attacks to harry their 

dangerous since both friends and foes (and even the wielder if they 
prey, exhausting it before swooping down to snatch it up with their 

fumble) can become ensnared by the indiscriminate gaze. 
immense claws. Attacks from the air are favoured over those from 
ground, but on land a griffin is not the ungainly creature it might 

Gorgon Attributes seem to be. It hunkers low, like a lion, to circle its prey, and strikes 

STR: 3d6+6 (17) Action Points 3 out with both beak and claws to grip and slash, immobilizing the foe 
before taking to the wing once more. 

CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier — +1d4 
Griffins usually form mated pairs that share an eyrie, and carve 

SIZ: 3d6+6 (17) Magic Points 16 
out a wide hunting territory that is defended from other predators 

DEX: 3d6+6 (17) Movement 6m 
and other griffins. Mated pairs tend to hunt in concert save for when 

INT: 2d6+9 (16) Initiative Bonus 14 (includes Armour Penalty) one remains to protect eggs or fledglings; yet if one gets into trouble 
POW: 2d6+9 (16) Armour Scales on serpentine it can unleash a powerful screech guaranteed to be heard by its mate, 

locations; Hoplite armour on and bring them to aid. Thus, when dealing with one griffin, a second 
upper body. is never far away. 

CHA: 3d6(11) Abilities Gaze Attack, Immunity Griffins can be tamed and used as human mounts if captured 
(Poisons), Terrifying, as chicks and raised for the task. Full-grown griffins are too wild 
Venomous to be tamed although stories exist of bonds being formed between 

Magic Devotion 57%, Exhort 67% some individuals and humans. Griffin cavalry mounts are therefore 
(Dismiss Magic, Enthrall, a much sought-after thing in certain cultures leading to daring raids 
Fear, Illusion) on griffin eyries for eggs and chicks; though the mortality rate for 

such adventures is high. 
1d20 Location AP/HP Hippogriffs are the result of a mating between a horse and a 

1-3 Tail Tip 4/6 griffin. Hippogriffs combine the head, forequarters and wings of a 

46 Mid Tail 4/7 giant eagle with the legs and hindquarters of a horse. These crea- 

7-9 Lower Body 4/8 tures inhabit similar territories to griffing but form quite separate 

10-12 Chest 5/9 communities — usually nesting in groups of up to twelve individuals. 
Hippogriffs display a higher measure of tolerance to their griffin 

13-15 Right Arm 5/6 
cousins and are somewhat easier to train and use as mounts. In all 

16-18 Left Arm 5/6 
other respects they act as griffins. 

19-20 Head 2/7 

Athletics 64%, Brawn 74%, Deceit 57%, Endurance 72%, Evade 74%, Insight 

62%, Perception 72%, Seduction 67%, Track 62%, Willpower 72% 

Passions 

Love Solitude 90%, Resent Mortals 70%, Hate Beauty 70% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Gorgon Horror (Talons, Tail, Snake Hair, Gaze and Bow) 74% 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Talons M S 1d4+1d4 As for Arm 

Tail L L 1d6+1d4 As for Tail 

Recurve Biw H - 1d8+1d4 4/8 

Snake Hair S S Poison As for head 

Gaze Special - - 

248



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Griffin Attributes 

STR: 3d6+12 (23) Action Points 3 

CON: 3d6+6 (17) Damage Modifier ~ +1d12 

SIZ: 3d6+24 (35) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 3d6+12 (23) Movement 8m, 18m (Flying) 

INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 18 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Teathers and Hide 

CHA: 2d6+12(19) Abilities Diving Strike, Flying 

Magic None 

1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-2 Right Hind Leg 1/11 

3-4 Left Hind Leg 1/11 

5-7 Hindquarters 1/12 

8-10 Torequarters 2/13 

11-12 Right Wing 2/10 

13-14 Left Wing 2/10 

15-16 Right Front Leg 2/11 

17-18 Left Front Leg 2/11 

19-20 Head 2/11 

Skills 

Athletics 76%, Brawn 78%, Endurance 64%, Evade 66%, Fly 76%, Perception 

64%, Willpower 52% 
HAaLlFflUinNGg CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

Despite being physically smaller and weaker than most other 
Combat Style & Weapons sapient species, halflings compensate with a certain nimbleness that 
Combat Style: Death from Above (Beak, Claws) 86% serves them well in sticky situations. Although unadventurous they 

are not cowardly: halflings might say they are, but when it comes to 
Weapon Size/ Force Reach Damage 

fighting for their homes and way of life they can summon enormous 
Beak H M 1d10+1d12 As for Head reserves of courage. In short, halflings make for good player char- 

acters — especially for those players who prefer sneaking around to 
Claws H L 1d8+1d12 As for Leg 

stalking boldly across the moorland. 

HAaLlFfLlIinNgG CUuLlTtUuRrEe 
Peaceful, civilized folk who live a largely agrarian existence, Hal- Halflings are Civilised, and use the Civilised skill choices found 

flings are diminutive humanoids who are shorter than dwarves by on pages 14 to 15. Their communities are closely-knit villages and 
around a head, but lighter of frame. Their homes are farms and small towns with several extended families forming the basis of the 
steads with villages forming close-knit communities. Halflings are community. Their industries are basic: agriculture primarily, but also 
not the most adventurous of races, and can go largely unnoticed as handicrafts such as pottery, weaving, leatherworking and textiles. 
they pose no kind of threat to anyone. They do work metals but very infrequently for weapons and armour. 

Halflings might be mistaken for dwarves but the differences are The common cultural unit for halflings is the Riding; an area 
obvious to those in the know. Halflings have large, rugged feet that bounded by three towns which makes the size of each riding vary 
are oversized for the body. Shoes and boots are shunned; the feet considerably. A Borough is formed of three Ridings. 
are extremely thick-soled providing more than adequate protection 
against rocks and stones. CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 

Whilst they are generally unadventurous, halflings are inquisitive. 
& Loyalty to Village, Town or Riding 

They like to know, and share, secrets. They adore stories, myths and 
& Love (Something emotional) 

fables, and have enquiring minds. This means that, when abroad, 
& Hate (Heavy Industry) 

the world is a fascinating place to be questioned and taken in — and 
this can lead them into trouble. Otherwise they are a rather prosaic, 
content race that keeps to itself, and prefer neither to interfere with PRrOoFfEeSsSsIioOnNSs 
the wider world or have it interfere with them. Beast Handler, Craftsman, Entertainer, Farmer, Fisherman, 

Herder, Merchant, Official, Physician, Scholar, Thief, Warrior 

249



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Halfling characters begin the game with commodities or cur- 
Shortsword S S 1d4+1-1d4 6/8 

rency worth 4d6 x30 silver pieces. 
Buckler M S 1d3-1d4 6/9 

THhEe HAaLlFfLlIinNgG VOoIiCcEe 
Sling L - 1d8-1d4 1/2 

‘Our Ruding — that us to say, the West Ruding — was_founded by the Hoar- 
Joots who were joined by the Slintwistles, and then, later the Argreaves. Now, the 
Hoarfoots never liked the Shintwistles much on account of Old Man Shintwistle HAaRrPpYy 
neglecting to invite Old Man Hoarfoot lo his birthday party. Truth be told, he Monsters from legend, harpies combine the head and breast of 

did, but forgot to post the invitation, so it just goes to show you what trouble a woman — usually an ugly, peevish hag — with the lower body and 

Jorgetfulness can getyou indo. wings of a vulture. Harpies are cruel, pernicious creatures that revel 

Where was I? Ah, yes, the West Riding. So, there are three villages — because in tormenting and inflicting suffering. It is rare for them to kill a foe 

that’s what Riding means: three — Hoarenderby, Slintenderby and Greavenderby outright, preferring instead to snatch, scratch and bite before flying 

named_for each of the founding families you see. Hoarenderby is famed for is off to a safe distance and shricking insults. 

wool, because it has good, soft water coming down off those hills which are just A favoured torment is the theft and despoiling of food. Harpies 

perfect for grazing sheep. Slintenderby produces the finest vegetables out of any might target an outdoors feast or banquet, or deliberately steal from 

districtyou care to mention, and Greavenderby’s beer is worth wearing shoes_for: food stores, setting out to wreck a fine harvest or ruin what mea- 

Areyou kungry? I am. Inf act, why don’t we walk to the Grey Lion at Greav- gre supplies a community has managed to put down for the winter 

enderby and have a jug off inest ale? I prefer Nadger’s Tat myself, because it has months. They rarely take food for their own sustenance: their delight 

that hoppiness, but I know you southerners prefer something a little lighter, so I'd is purely in denying others. Harpies typically dive and strike, aiming 

say go_for the Golden Honeydew. But, really, you can’t go wrong with anything for the head and upper body, inflicting scratches with their sharp 

you drink at the Grey Lion because Duffer Widget — he’s the landlord — knows claws. Additionally they attempt to seize weapons and shields (using 

fus cellaring, and none of fus beers are ever sows; off or watered. And they do a the Grip special effect) which they then carry away and drop, well 

cracking plate of bread and cheese to. .. out of reach. 

C’mon... I know! Let’s sing a walking song as we go...’ Harpies are natural enemies of iqari. If iqari move into a region 
frequented by harpies they devote their efforts to driving off or kill- 

Halfling Attributes ing the monsters as quickly as possible. 

STR: 2d6 (7) Action Points 3 

Attributes 
CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier ~ -1d4 

STR: 3d6 (11) Action Points 3 
SIZ: 1d3+6 (8) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 3d6+3 (14) Movement 4m CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier ~ None 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 14 SI1Z: 1d6+9 (13) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 4d6+6 (20) Movement 4m, 12m (Flying) 
POW: 3d6 (11) Armour None 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 17 
CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities None 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Teathers 
Magic Usually none, but halfling 

specialists can follow any CHA: 1d6 (4) Abilities Diving Attack, Flying 

magical path. Magic None 

1d20 Location AP/HP 1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Right Leg 0/4 1-3 Right Claw 1/5 

4-6 Left Leg 0/4 46 Left Claw 1/5 

7-9 Abdomen 0/5 79 Abdomen 1/6 

10-12 Chest 0/6 10-12 Chest 0/7 

13-15 Right Arm 0/3 13-15 Right Wing 1/4 

16-18 Left Arm 0/3 16-18 Left Wing 1/4 

19-20 Head 0/4 19-20 Head 0/5 

Skills 

Athletics 41%, Brawn 35%, Craft (any) 57%, Customs 66%, Deceit 46%, Athletics 51%, Brawn 44%, Deceit 57%, Endurance 42%, Evade 60%, Fly 71%, 

Endurance 62%, Evade 68%, Insight 54%, Locale 66%, Lore (Agriculture) 56%, Perception 64%, Willpower 42% 

Perception 64%, Sleight 55%, Stealth 67%, Unarmed 41%, Willpower 52% 

Passions 

Combat Style & Weapons Greed 99%, Spiteful 95%, Love Suffering 95% 

Halfling Constable (Sword, Sling, Shield) 51% 

250



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

swarm activity, with individuals targeting exposed areas of flesh with 
Combat & Weapons 

stings, and bites to drive a foe away. 
Snatch and Grab (Claws) 71% 

It is almost impossible to kill a swarm: there are simply too many 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage individuals. The only hope is to either outrun it or find a way of tak- 
ing cover (water is not always an effective way of evading a swarm 

Claws M M 1d4 As for Claw 
of insects, since they often wait about for the victim to surface). A 
swarm may decide to cease an attack if it collectively feels a threat 

HOoRrSsEe has been neutralized: after 1d3 rounds of combat, make a Willpower 
There are many varieties of horse, bred for different purposes. roll for the swarm. If the roll is successful then the swarm abates its 

All have enormous stamina and capacity for hard work. Most cul- attacks, and returns to its nest or previous activity. 
tures have domesticated the horse for use as a primary riding and A swarm can be harmed if an attack — magical or mundane — 
beast of burden. which inflicts area damage can be directed at the swarm, engulf- 

This example is for a standard riding mount that can be bought ing at least 75% of it. In such cases the swarm has a number of 
or hired by most adventurers. For a War Horse — one bred specif- Hit Points equal to its SIZ, and any damage reduces the size of the 
ically for its size and reliability in battle — add a further 4 to both swarm commensurately. 
STR and SIZ. For a Heavy Horse — one used specifically for heavy The normal characteristics for creatures are not applicable to 
agricultural work, add 8 to STR and SIZ instead. swarms. Instead, only one characteristic is given: SIZ. This is used 

to gauge the volume of the swarm in comparison with an average 
Attributes human. A swarm of SIZ 6 is enough to engulf one half of the body. 

STR: 2d6+15 (22) Action Points 2 A swarm of 12 is enough to engulf the entire body. A swarm of SIZ 
24 could engulf two opponents simultaneously. The potency of the 

CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d12 
attack is based on SIZ, as follows: 

SIZ: 2d6+24 (31) Magic Points 7 

DEX: 2d6+3 (10) Movement 12m 
InNsSeEcCtT SwWAarRmM DAaMmAaGgEe 

INS: 2d6+4 (11) Initiative Bonus 11 /A Sting/Bite Damage Combat Actions 

POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Hide 1-5 1 1 

Abilities None 6-11 1d2 2 

Magic None 12-18 1d3 3 

19-25 1d4 4 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

26-33 1d6 5 
1-3 Right Hind Leg 1/9 

4-6 Left Hind Leg 1/9 The damage from stings and bites are applied simultaneously to 
7-9 Hindquarters 1/10 every location covered by the swarm. Worn armour initially counts 
10-12 Forequarters 1/11 against this damage, but is reduced by 1 point for each successtul 
13-14 Right Front Leg 1/8 attack, as the insects begin to crawl inside gaps in the clothing. For 

15-16 Left Front Leg 1/8 example, a victim wearing brigandine armour who stumbles into a 

1720 Head 1/9 swarm of SIZ 6, will be immune to the swarm’s first three attacks but 
eventually the insects will find a way in. Normal clothing provides no 

Skills protection, unless especially thick — for example winter wear. 

Athletics 52%, Brawn 83%, Endurance 66%, Evade 40%, Perception 48%, Swarms do not generate Special Effects, and neither do they 

Willpower 34% use Combat Actions to parry or evade unless attacked with an area 
affect assault. On the other hand a victim can use Evade to tempo- 

Combat Style & Weapons rarily avoid a swarm. Otherwise they must flee, hide or seek cover. 

Rear and Plunge (Hoofs) 62% Swarms fly at a base Movement Rate of 4, but can augment this rate 
by using their Athletics skill. 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

SwWAarRmM SKkIiLlLlSs:: 
Hoof H L 1d6+1d12 As for Leg 

Athletics 60%, Fly 60%, Willpower 30%, Swarm Attack (Stings 
or Bites) 60% 

Whenever a character is stung by a swarm of poisonous insects, 
InNsSeEcCtT SwWAarRmM 

he may succumb to the increasing levels of venom introduced into 
Insects on their own are a nuisance. As an angry swarm, they 

his body. Keep track of the accumulating value of the damage suf- 
can be lethal. A swarm of bees or wasps can contain thousands of 

fered from each attack, which represents the growing toxicity of the 
individuals, all acting in concert. Most swarms are not in response 

venom. Every time the character experiences another attack, they 
to a threat — although it is an effective tactic — but as part of the 

must make an opposed roll of their Endurance versus the new level 
reproductive cycle. However, any disturbance of a hive can result in 

of toxicity. Failure means that they suffer the effects of the insect’s 
venom. 

251



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

I]qQAaRrIi Attributes 

A humanoid race with the head, wings and lower body of a STR: 3d6+12 (23) Action Points 3 
giant raptor (eagle is the most common, but there are also hawk, CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 
owl, kestrel and osprey species), and the upper body of a human; SIZ: 2d6+12 (19) Magic Points 11 
the iqari dwell in the high places of the world: mountains and hills DEX: 2d6+12 (19) Movement 6m, 18m (Flying) 
surrounded by open pastures and deep valleys. They shun contact 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 14 (includes armour) 
with most other sapient races although it has been known for cer- 
tain iqari, deemed mad by their kin, to seek out social contact with POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Teathers, Leather Kilt and 

others. Vambraces 

Iqari are fierce and tenacious hunters, patrolling the skies above CHA: 3d6(11) Abilities Diving Attack, Flying 

their territories in search of prey that can either be carried back Magic Iqari generally practice 

to the eyries or killed, and butchered in-situ with meat then being Mysticism (Meditation 56%, 

returned. Iqari hunters always carry the tools requisite for the job: a Mysticism 54%). Specialist 

hunting spear, flint knives (occasionally metal), and bone needles for shaman also gain Animism 

sewing sacks from the skin of the prey to carry their spoils. Favoured (Trance 64%, Binding 62%) 

quarry are mammals of most sizes, but iqari shy away from attack- 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

ing anything too large because, even with superior numbers, butch- 
ering, and carrying away the remains would take too long and leave 1-3 Right Leg 2/7 

the hunting pack exposed. 46 Left Leg 2/7 

Iqari are intelligent and social amongst their own kind. An eyrie 79 Abdomen 3/8 

consists of up to six or seven iqari (parents and young) with many 10 Chest 0/9 
eyries clustered together forming a settlement. They worship the 

11-12 Right Wing 0/7 
spirits of the air and mountains, and iqari shaman can be powerful 

13-14 Left Wing 0/7 
animists able to channel and harness both the great ancestor spir- 
its and the spirits of the hunt and the winds. Their language is a 15-16 Right Arm 1/6 
complex amalgam of squawks, chitters, head movements, hand and 

17-18 Left Arm 1/6 
wing gestures. They are incapable of speaking human tongues but 
can understand them and use sign language to communicate back. 19-20 Head 2/7 

However, given their reclusive nature, opportunities for encounter- 
ing an iqari capable of understand human language is rare. 

They have few natural enemies, although there is competition Athletics 62%, Brawn 62%, Endurance 56%, Evade 58%, Fly 82%, Paralyzing 

between iqari, griffins and hippogriffs for hunting territories. This Screech 62%, Perception 64%, Sign Language 54%, Stealth 52%, Survival 54%, 

can result in spectacular and bloody aerial battles, ultimately end- Unarmed 72%, Willpower 52% 

ing in a certain degree of demarcation and co-operation. Iqari have 
very high standards of personal honour. A worthy sapient foe will be Combat Style & Weapons 

allowed to live to fight another day, and if the opponent was truly Iqari Warrior (Spear, Beak, Claw, Wing Strike) 72% 

worthy of respect, the iqari warrior may gift it with a wing feather 
Size/Force Reach Damage 

— the highest honour these creatures can bestow. The one creature 
iqari will aim to slaughter are harpies. These airborne hags are the Beak M T 1d4+1d8 As for Head 

complete antithesis of iqari, and the birdmen show little mercy Claw M S 1d6+1d8 As for Leg 
when harpies stray into their regions. 

The iqari’s Paralysing Screech skill (base POW+CHA) forces Wing Strike L VL 1d3+1d8 As for Wing 

those within 5 metres to make an opposed Willpower roll against the Longspear L VL 1d10+1+1d8 4/10 

iqari’s skill. Anyone who is unsuccessful is paralysed by the horrific 
noise for a single combat round and temporarily deafened. Those in the iqari experiencing the equivalent of a panic attack, and this 
who make their roll are merely deafened for 1d6 melee rounds, may result in extremely manic, and possibly even violent behaviour 

unable to communicate verbally. Each successful use of this ability especially if an exit is not in evidence. 
costs the iqari a single magic point. A further challenge is that of language. Iqari are not equipped 

with the vocal organs to even approximate human speech, and so 
IqQAaRrIi CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs sign language is essential if the creature is to make itself understood 

Playing an iqari can pose some challenges unless all the charac- (although understanding sapient tongues is quite possible). And, as 
ters are also iqari. Those iqari who seek out the company of other raptors, iqari are exclusively carnivorous preferring either live meat 
races are considered insane by their own kind and, indeed, may be or raw, freshly killed food. This too may prove to be a challenge for 
in the throes of some psychosis. non-iqari in a party. 

Iqari abhor confinement. Buildings and rooms hold a special fear Otherwise, iqari are an intelligent species with a sophisticated 
for them as they have an innate need to see the open sky at all times. system of honour and its recognition. Iqari society has a rigorous 
Venturing underground, even for brief periods, requires a successful set of laws to ensure that they do not return back to the beasts they 
Willpower roll which must be remade every hour. Failed rolls result were raised from. These are formalised into ritual songs which are 

252



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsIioOnNSs 
Craftsman, Hunter, Shaman, Warrior 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy 
Igari characters begin the game with commodities or currency 

worth 4d6 x10 silver pieces. 

ThHEe I1qQAaRrIi VOoIiCcEe 

You shall not be an animal. 
You shall not steal another’s glory. 
You shall not act against a brother without open challenge. 
Let those with less glory actf urst. 
Defend_your eyre orfind another 
Guwe surplus to those less able. 
Maiming during play is loss of self control. 
Needless death threatensfuture eggs. 
Fall not upon the prey at the furst smell of blood, 
lest someone be hunting yours; 
Withhold the claw in times of insufferable insult, 
lest it snatches away your reputation; 
Fat not the flesh of thinking life, 
lest your appetite consumes_your soul. 
A clear mind costs only patience.’ 

Typical Igari mantra taught to fledglings. 

repeatedly sung to the young. They are taught that the only thing 
LioonN 

preventing the iqari from devolving are their principles. Those who 
Savannah and plains-dwelling big cats, lions form prides of 

break the laws have no honour, and are thus considered mindless 
animals. This sense of personal honour is so strong that if an Iqari between 10 and 20 (around five females and cubs, and two or three 

breaks the codes, even by no fault of their own, the psychologi- males). Males excluded from a pride can, and do, become rogue 
wanderers, and so lions can also be encountered singly. The females 

cal backlash can drive them into insanity...and insanity generally 
perform most of the hunting with the males guarding the pride’s 

equates to self destruction. 
territory from other prides and interlopers. 

CUuLlTtUuRrEe Hunting is a co-ordinated business with three or more lionesses 

Iqari society is strange by human standards but most closely stalking and chasing-down prey over a protracted period. Such 

resembles the Primitive and Barbarian cultures, depending on the teamwork increases the success of the hunt. Fach lioness in a hunt- 

size and sophistication of the community. Smaller communities tend ing party has a preferred role, with a leader and stalkers who trian- 

more towards the primitive whilst larger, older ones tend more to gulate to reduce the chance of prey escaping. 

embody the barbarian. Skill choices should reflect one of these two It is rare for lions to prey on humans but not unheard of. Settle- 

cultures. ments with livestock populations that are established too close to a 
pride’s territories increases the chance of attacks, and rogue males 

& Customs+40%, Native Tongue+40% (particularly the sick or injured), driven by hunger, will look for what- 
& Standard Skills: Brawn, Dance, Endurance, Locale, Percep- ever prey is available. 

tion, Sing, Unarmed 
& Example Combat Styles: Iqari Hunter, Eyrie Sentinel, Fallen 

Lion Attributes 
Psychotic 

& Professional Skills: Courtesy, Craft (any primitive), Fly, Lore STR: 2d6+12(19) Action Points 3 

(any), Meditation, Mysticism, Navigation, Survival CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 

SIZ: 2d6+15 (22) Magic Points 7 

DEX: 3d6+6 (17) Movement 8m 
CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 

INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 15 
& Loyalty to Eyrie 

POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Mane and Hide 
& Love (Freedom) 
& Hate (Confinement) Abilities Intimidate, Night Sight 

Magic None 

253



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

1d20 Location AP/HP Lizard, Giant Attributes 

1-2 Right Hind Leg 1/7 STR: 2d6+12(19) Action Points 3 

34 Left Hind Leg 1/7 CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d6 
5-7 Hindquarters 1/8 SIZ: 2d6+12 (19) Magic Points 7 
8-10 Forequarters 1/9 DEX: 1d6+12 (16) Movement 10m 

11-13 Right Front Leg 1/7 INS: 2d6+5 (12) Initiative Bonus 14 

14-16 Left Front Leg 1/7 
POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Tough Scales 

1720 Head 3/7 
Abilities Adhering (some), Cold 

Blooded, Intimidate 

Magic None 

Athletics 66%, Brawn 61%, Endurance 52%, Evade 54%, Perception 50%, 

Willpower 44% 1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Tail 3/7 

4-5 Right Hind Leg 3/7 
Combat Style & Weapons 

6-7 Left Hind Leg 3/7 
King Slayer (Bite, Claw) 76% 

8-10 Hindquarters 3/8 

Size/ Force Reach Damage 11-14 Forequarters 3/9 

Bite L S 1d8+1d8 As for Head 15-16 Right Front Leg 3/6 

17-18 Left Front Leg 3/6 
Claw L M 1d6+1d8 As for Leg 

19-20 Head 3/7 

LizaARrDd,, GIiaAnNTt 
Many species of giant lizard exist and, whilst appearances will 

differ, most giant lizards share very similar characteristics. They are Athletics 65%, Brawn 58%, Endurance 56%, Evade 72%, Perception 68%, Track 

all cold-blooded, all predators of some kind, and all need warm to 55%, Stealth 68%, Willpower 44% 

hot conditions to thrive. Lizards are found throughout jungles, arid 
areas, hills and mountains as long as their environmental needs are 
being met. Combat Style & Weapons 

Sight is highly important for most types of lizard, both for locat- Scaly Hunter (Jaws, Claws) 75% 

ing prey and for communication. Consequently many lizards have 
Size/Force Reach Damage 

highly acute colour and heat vision, and therefore excellent percep- 
tion. Most lizards rely heavily on body language, using specific pos- Bite M T 1d6+1d6 As for Head 

tures, gestures and movements to define territory, resolve disputes 
Claw M M 1d4+1d6 As for Leg 

and entice mates, which leads to deliberate, almost ritualistic move- 
ments that some cultures reflect in religious dances and ceremonies. 

Many lizards are brightly coloured to warn potential predators, LizzaZrAdRmDMaAnN//OOPpHhIidDIiaAnN 
but some keep their colouration hidden until needed (with crests, Classic creatures of fantasy literature Lizardmen and Ophidians 

wattles, on the underside of the belly, and so forth). Lizards are ter- are closely related species of bipedal sapient reptiles. Lizardmen are 

ritorial, and guard their territories against other predators but are, self explanatory, possessing muscular bodies, clawed hands and feet, 

generally, ambivalent towards humans unless hungry or threatened. clongated snouts filled with snaggle teeth, heavy tails and scaled, 

Some species, like the monitor lizards, are notorious for attacks, and often beautifully coloured skin. Ophidians are similar but take their 

will consider anything warm blooded and moving fair prey. primary attributes from snakes rather than lizards; and thus have 

Lizards apply a number of different techniques when hunting, a leaner, more humanoid build, stubbier snouts, venomous fangs 

anything from launching ambushes from cover, dropping atop vic- instead of peg teeth, and are more intelligent than their brethren. 

tims, or even running rapidly over concealed patches of quicksand Both species share a cold, reptilian outlook on life; but whereas 

or water to lure prey to a lingering death. lizardmen tend to form primitive or occasionally barbarian societ- 

A defensive technique used by some lizard species is to shed the ies, the ophidians are naturally inclined to civilisation, and all the 

tail completely if it is grabbed and held by a predator. The tail will decadence and treachery which it brings. Like chalk and cheese, 

regenerate but is usually shorter and of a different hue to the orig- one is a race of illiterate savages, the other amoral and urbane. The 

inal. Detaching the tail in this fashion causes the lizard no wound lizardmen are more prone to direct physical confrontation whereas 

effects. ophidians prefer subtle manipulation or assassination. 
With their thick scales, and inured resilience towards both damp 

and desiccated environments, the reptilian races prefer to live in 
regions deemed living hells, such as burning deserts, arid waste- 
lands, pestilent swamps, and steamy, tropical jungles. Within these 
fastnesses their civilisations rise and fall in cycles beyond the ken of 

254



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Lizardman/Ophidian Attributes 

STR: 2d6+9 (16) Action Points 3 

CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d4 

SI1Z: 2d6+9 (16) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 6m 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 13 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Tough Scales. Warriors can 

wear any. 

CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities Cold Blooded, Night Sight 

Magic Specialists may practice 

Animism or Theism 

1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Tail 3/6 

4-5 Right Leg 3/6 

6-7 Left Leg 3/6 

8-10 Abdomen 3/7 

11-14 Chest 3/8 

15-16 Right Arm 3/5 

17-18 Left Arm 3/5 

19-20 Head 3/6 

other sapient species. Only when differing cultures are forced into 
cach other’s territory do folk begin to go missing, killed for trespass- 

Athletics 59%, Brawn 62%, Craft (Any primitive) 56%, Customs 56%, Endurance 
ing or taken for sacrifice; or perhaps worse still captured to be eaten, 

66%, Evade 56%, Insight 44%, Locale 66%, Perception 54%, Swim 69%, 
for the lizardmen are prone to cannibalism, and have a taste for 

Unarmed 59%, Willpower 52% 
human flesh. 

When not engaged in war, lizardmen often manufacture tools 
Passions 

and weapons, usually for trade or as sacrifices to the local gods and 
Loyalty to Tribe 90%, Hate Enemies 80% 

spirits. Ophidians on the other hand have more refined tastes, and 
craft art or scholarly works, their focus more being towards the sor- 

Combat Style & Weapons 
cerous or mystical talents. 

Lizardman Warrior (Stone Axe, Shortspear, Target Shield) 69% 
The following characteristics denote a lizardman. Ophidians 

have slightly different base characteristics, swapping the dice rolls 
Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

for STR with POW and SIZ with INT. They have two less Armour 
Bite M M 1d6+1d4 As for Head 

Points than lizardmen, but in exchange have the Venomous trait, 
injecting the poison with their bite. Substitute Craft with a suitable Claw M T 1d4+1d4 As for Arm 

Lore skill. Most ophidians know Folk Magic, and specialists study 
Tail M L 1d4+1d4 As for Tail 

Sorcery or Mysticism. 
Shortspear M L 1d8+1+1d4 4/5 

OPpHhIiDdIiaAnN VEenNoOmM 
Stone Axe M M 1d6+1+1d4 4/8 

Ophidian venom has a Potency of 70%. A victim must win an 
opposed roll of his Endurance against the Potency of the venom else Target Shield L S 1d3+1+1d4 4/9 

suffer the following symptoms. At the start of the round following 
being poisoned, the bitten location suffers the Agony condition, ren- MAaMmMmOoTtHh 
dering it unusable for the next 2d6 minutes, and possibly disrupting Pachyderms that thrive in colder climates, mammoths are con- 
any attempts at concentration or spell casting. One hour later the siderably larger and more dangerous than elephants. The MYTHRAS 
victim begins to suffer the combined effects of Hallucination and mammoth stands some three and a half metres at the shoulder. With 
Mania, developing a rabid fear of snakes. This effect lasts 2d6 days, its woolly, shaggy covering of fur, this immense beast is truly a sight 
during which time the victim grows increasingly paranoid until they to behold. 
must eventually be tied up for their own safety. After the poison sub- The tusks of the mammoth are extremely long with a distinct out- 
sides the victim will have no recollection of what bit them or how. ward bow and upward curve, making them both formidable weap- 

ons and highly prized sets of ivory. The skin and fur is extremely 
warm, and the layers of subcutaneous fat mean that, all in all, a 

255



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

mammoth is a much-hunted beast, especially amongst primitive cul- ELleEpPhHAaNnTtSs 
tures that share a similar climate to the mammoth’s herd territories. If an elephant is needed for a MYTHRAS game, the mammoth’s 

Mammoths, like elephants, live and move in herds of up to statistics are the obvious starting point. Reduce STR and SIZ by 10 
twenty creatures. All herd members will fight to protect themselves points to approximate the elephant’s smaller stature (they typically 
and their young. An enraged mammoth is not to be trifled with. weigh between 3 and 6 tons, compared with a mammoth’s 5 to 10 
Above and beyond their stampede and trampling ability, the vast tons). Elephants have shorter tusks, so reduce the Size to Huge and 
tusks and strong, probing trunk mean that mammoths are daunting Reach to Long. An elephant’s trunk is also longer than that of a 
opponents. mammoth, but there is no necessity to amend the trunk statistics 

Fur, on its own, is not enough to offer protection against the cold. from those given above. 
Mammoths also have a layer of subcutaneous fat up to a hand width The other obvious difference is that elephants are a tropical and 
deep. This fat is an important commodity for many cultures, just as sub-tropical species meaning that they lack both the fur and subcu- 
blubber is from whales. Where mammoths exist, one can therefore taneous fat of the mammoth. Reduce the elephant’s natural Armour 
guarantee industries, even primitive ones, to exploit the mammoth’s Points to 7 across all locations. 
natural resources. The Intimidate and Trample abilities remain the same, as do 

Mammoths attempt to trample first, taking advantage of their skills and Combat Styles. 
size and weight. If forced into close combat, the trunk is used to 
grip, and then hurl an opponent as far as possible (1d6+4 metres, 
with falling damage sustained by the victim). If the trunk cannot be MAaNnTtIiCcOoRrEe 
engaged, then the tusks are used to smash small opponents (such as A manticore is a wild beast, powerful, daring, as big as the largest 

humans) or gore larger ones. lion, its thick fur of a red colour like cinnabar. Its face however is not 
that of a wild beast but of a man, and it has three rows of teeth set 
in its upper jaw, and three in the lower; these are exceedingly sharp 

Mammoth Attributes 
and larger than the fangs of a hound. Its ears also resemble a man’s 

STR: 2d6+40 (47) Action Points 2 except that they are larger and shaggy; its eyes are blue-grey and 
CON: 2d6+24 (31) Damage Modifier ~ +2d10 they too are like a man’s, but its feet and claws are those of a lion. 
SIZ: 2d6+56 (63) Magic Points 11 To the end of its insectoid tail is attached the sting of a scorpion, 

DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 10m which might be over half a metre in length; and the tail has barbs 

INS: 2d6+4 (11) Initiative Bonus 11 at intervals on either side. The tip of the tail gives a fatal sting to 
anyone who encounters it, and death is immediate. The manticore 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Woolly pelt and hide 
can cast its barbs like arrows, by flicking its tail and shooting them a 

Abilities Intimidate, Trample 

Magic None 

1d20 Location 

1-2 Right Hind Leg 9/19 

3-4 Left Hind Leg 9/19 

5-8 Hindquarters 9/20 

9-12 Forequarters 9/21 

13-14 Right Front Leg 9/19 

15-16 Left Front Leg 9/19 

17 Trunk 9/18 

18-20 Head 9/19 

Athletics 58%, Brawn 130%, Endurance 92%, Evade 22%, Perception 52%, 

Willpower 52% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Trampling Doom (Trunk, Trample, Gore) 78% 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Trunk C VL 1d10+2d10 As for Trunk 

Tusks C VL 1d12+2d10 As for Head 

Trample C T 4d10 As for Leg 

256



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

great distance. Most creatures that the missile hits are killed due to itself. It has two remarkable features: the elongated forelimbs that 
the beast’s poison. These barbs replenish themselves constantly so are used to catch and hold prey immobile, and its extremely long 
that it rarely runs out of ammunition. and flexible thorax which permits amazing limb dexterity whilst the 

Manticora are all vicious predators feeding on whatever they can body remains static. Also of note is the insect’s field of vision. Its 
hunt, but for preference it will devour human beings; indeed it will massive compound eyes and neck articulation grant the mantis a 
slaughter a great number; utterly fearless, willingly ambushing two wide field of vision through 300 degrees, making it difficult to creep 
or even three men, and alone overcoming that number. As if this was up on from behind. 
not bad enough, a few are cursed with chaotic gifts which twist or Mantids are ambush hunters. The giant variety conceals itself 
deform them in some way, granting them wings for example. in foliage and branches, remaining motionless for extremely long 

Manticore venom has a Potency equal to the creature’s Endur- periods until suitable prey strays within range of its forelimbs. The 
ance. It takes effect 1 round after damage has been inflicted, and insects can fly, doing so mainly at night to move between hunting 
causes paralysis to 1d3 contiguous hit locations. If this affects the locations, and some mantids have distinct territories that are heavily 
chest the victim begins to asphyxiate and will die unless treated. defended. During mating season females are known to kill and eat 

their mates once copulation is complete. 
Consummate ambushers, manti wait, motionless, for prey to 

MAaNTnItSis,, GIiaAnNTt 
wander close enough for an attack which happens with frighten- 

At three metres in length, the giant praying mantis is a quite 
ing speed. Match the mantis’s Stealth against a victim’s Perception 
(remembering the Camouflage penalty) in an opposed roll to deter- 

Manticore Attributes mine the outcome of the ambush. 
STR: 2d6+15 (22) Action Points 3 The mantis strikes with its forelimbs first, automatically gripping 

CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier ~ +1d10 the prey if the attack is successful. If it wins a special effect it usually 

SIZ: 2d6+18 (25) Magic Points 11 selects Pin Weapon (if the opponent has a drawn weapon or held 
shield) or Kill Silently. On its next turn the victim is yanked back to 

DEX: 3d6+6 (17) Movement 10m 
the mantis which delivers a bite with its powerful mandibles, aiming 

INS: 2d6+7 (14) Initiative Bonus 16 
for the neck, chest or abdomen in a bid to quickly incapacitate. If a 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Fur, Mane and Chitin victim breaks free of the insect’s grip or the initial attack fails, then 
Abilities Frenzy, Leaper, Venomous the mantis will attempt to fly away and hunt something else. A man- 

tis will not try to ambush a creature that is clearly larger than itself. 
Magic None 

1d20 Location API/HP 

1-3 Tail 6/9 

4-5 Right Hind Leg 3/9 
Mantis, Giant Attributes 

6-7 Left Hind Leg 3/9 
STR: 2d6+6 (13) Action Points 3 

8-10 Hindquarters 3/10 

CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d4 
11-14 Forequarters 3/11 

SIZ: 2d6+12 (19) Magic Points 4 
15-16 Right Front Leg 3/9 

DEX: 2d6+18 (25) Movement 6m, 10m (Flying) 
17-18 Left Front Leg 3/9 

INS: 2d6+2 (9) Initiative Bonus 17 

19-20 Head 5/9 
POW: 1d6 (4) Armour Chitin 

Abilities Camouflaged, Flying, 

Grappler 
Athletics 69%, Brawn 61%, Endurance 72%, Evade 74%, Perception 65%, Stealth 

Magic None 
71%, Track 60, Willpower 62% 

1d20 Location AP/HP 

Combat Style & Weapons 1 Right Rear Leg 3/6 

Man Hunter (Bite, Claws, Barbs and Sting) 79% 2 Left Rear Leg 3/6 

3-4 Metathorax 3/8 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 5 Mid Right Leg 3/6 

Jaws M T 1d4+1d10 As for Head 6 Mid Left Leg 3/6 

Claws L M 1d6+1d10 As for Leg 7-10 Prothorax 3/9 

11-12 Right Wing 3/6 
Sting H L 1d8+1d10+Vencom  As for Leg 

13-14 Left Wing 3/6 
Flung Barbs L - 1d6+1d10+Venom 

15-16 Right Forelimb 3/6 

17-18 Left Forelimb 3/6 

formidable predator that feeds exclusively on creatures smaller than 19-20 Head 3/7 

257



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Minotaurs are much larger than humans. Males average well 
over two metres tall. They are powerful and massively built, with 

Athletics 78%, Brawn 72%, Endurance 56%, Evade 80%, Fly 68%, Perception 
a natural confidence and swagger amongst their own kind. Males 

53%, Stealth 74%, Willpower 48% 
are blessed with oversized horns, and proudly display battle scars 
as badges of honour. A few have the lower halves and the hoofed 

Combat Style & Weapons 
legs of bulls. Armour is rarely worn, more from the fact that none 

Unseen Death (Scything Limbs, Bite) 78% amongst their culture knows the art of smithing and salvaged war 
trophies rarely fit, rather than any philosophical attitudes towards it. 

Weapon Size /Force Reach Damage 
Their favoured weapons are great axes or two handed clubs, 

Forelimb L VL 1d6+1d4 As for Limb 
with which they delight in smashing opponents about. There is no 

Mandibles M M 1d4+1d4 As for Head doubting that minotaurs are tenacious fighters and have little trouble 
rising to aggression when the need calls for it. They are brave but 
merciless fighters, and believe in putting a foe down as quickly and 

MIiNnOoTtAaUuRr 
brutally as possible. When faced with chaos-tainted species, such as 

Bovine-headed and man-bodied, minotaurs are anthropomor- 
boar-kin and chaos hybrids, minotaurs show no mercy. They have 

phic hybrids of myth and legend. In the original Greek myth the 
an innate hatred of chaos and attempt to stamp it out whenever and 

minotaur was a single beast known also as Asterion, which dwelled 
wherever they can. 

in the labyrinth of Crete, beneath the palace of King Minos, where 
Socially most minotaurs tend to be bluff, gruff and taciturn 

it received regular sacrifices. 
with a reputation for being, at best, rude to other species and, at 
worst, outwardly aggressive. Some of this reputation comes with the 



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

struggle minotaurs have with human tongues. They can understand STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy 
them well enough, but speaking them is difficult. No minotaur can Minotaur characters begin the game with commodities or cur- 
speak a human tongue at higher than 50%, owing the sheer differ- rency worth 4d6 x20 silver pieces. 
ences in minotaur physiology and vocal dynamics. 

Minotaurs have a polygynous social structure. Males may take THhEe MIiNnOoTtAaUuRr VOoIiCcEe 
several wives and herd leaders always have a harem, which are won “These field and trails belong to the Buru-hrunz tribe andyou trespass. Are 
by demonstrating martial prowess and great deeds. Primarily vege- you want make us angry? We willf ight of have to, and my horns will drip your 

tarians, minotaurs consume vast amounts of fruits and wild grains blood, but we want you go now, so we not have to kill you. If you come to trade, 

every day, supplementing their diet with milk and cheese from their we happy to change goods but be quick about business. We have silver; bronze and 

herds. Minotaur warbands have been known to raid cattle herders want strong weapons and sharp tools. 

who move into a minotaur grazing areas, sparing only the cattle So? You challenge me? Or what? You flee, you trade or you die. Simple.’ 
(which they release) but massacring the herders. 

Several minotaur tribes live in close proximity to Meeros 
Minotaur Attributes 

although they maintain a respectful distance. Like the Meerish they 
revere Myceras, although they depict the War God as the primary STR: 3d6+6 (17) Action Points 2 

deity of their cosmology - the father of all other gods. CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d6 

They consider the Meerish pantheon to be a blasphemy against SIZ: 2d6+15 (22) Magic Points 11 

Myceras and do not recognise Meerish temples or rites. DEX: 2d6+3 (10) Movement 8m 

They do, however, recognise the bravery that Myceras’s warriors INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 12 
exhibit in battle and accord a level of respect to those who display 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Horns and Hide. Warriors 
courtesy and honour. 

may wear any armour 

MIiNnOoTtAaUuRr CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Intimidate, Trample 

More sociable minotaurs can make for excellent player charac- Magic Some herds may have 

ters as long as the limitations regarding language are remembered. specialist priests and shaman. 

Minotaurs are tough, proud and irascible, but they are also intelli- Sorcery tends to be shunned. 

gent and can even be compassionate when the time calls for it. How- 
ever if a party ever required a stoic, strong, silent, brute of a warrior, 1d20 Location AP/HP 

then nothing fits the bill quite like a minotaur. 1-3 Right Leg 0/7 

4-6 Left Leg 0/7 

CUuLlTtUuRrEe 79 Abdomen 0/8 
Minotaurs form small societies well away from standard humans. 10-12 Chest 0/9 

They rarely tend to rise above the level of a Barbarian culture, and 
13-15 Right Arm 0/6 

most are nomadic because their beliefs and behaviour are based on 
strength and survival rather than higher notions of art and social 16-18 Left Arm 0/6 

development. Since beasts of burden or wheeled vehicles are rarely 19-20 Head 3/7 

used, minotaur possessions are limited to what they carry them- 
selves. The Drive and Ride skills are redundant unless the minotaurs Skills 

are from a culture where giant riding or pack animals are readily 
Athletics 57%, Brawn 79%, Customs 66%, Endurance 66%, Evade 40%, Insight 

available. 44%, Locale 56%, Lore (Herding) 66%, Perception 54%, Unarmed 57%, 

Willpower 42% 
& Customs+40%, Native Tongue +40% 
& Standard Skills: Athletics, Brawn, Endurance, Influence, 

Combat Style & Weapons 
Locale, Perception, Unarmed 

& Example Combat Styles: Minotaur Warrior, Horned Ber- Minotaur Warrior (Two Handed Axe, Longspear used one handed, Hoplite Shield, 

Gore) 67% 
serker, Hoofed Hunter 

& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (any primitive), Healing, 
Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Language (any), Lore (any), Navigation, Survival, Track 
Massive Axe E VL 2d8+2+1d6 6/12 

Long Spear H VL 1d10+1+1d6 4/10 
CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 

Hoplite Shield E M 1d4+1d6 6/15 
« Loyalty to Herd 
« Love (Freedom, Battle) Gore L M 1d8+1d6 As for Head 

& Hate (Chaos) 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsIioOnNSs 
Crafter, Farmer, Herder, Priest, Shaman, Warrior 

259



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

MuumMmMmmy Mummy Attributes 

STR: 3d6+9 (20) Action Points 2 

CON: 3d6+9 (20) Damage Modifier ~ +1d6 

SIZ: 2d6+6 (13) Magic Points 22 

DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 6m 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative 12 

POW: 1d6+18 (22) Armour As per original creature with 

bandages and burial armour. 

CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Imunity (Poison, Disease), Life 

Sense, Undead 

Magic Some may retain the magical 

skills possessed in life. 

1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Right Leg 2/7 

46 Left Leg 2/7 

79 Abdomen 2/8 

10-12 Chest 2/9 

13-15 Right Arm 2/6 

16-18 Left Arm 2/6 

19-20 Head 2/7 

Athletics 51%, Brawn 63%, Endurance 70%, Evade 42%, Perception 63%, 

Unarmed 71%, Willpower 84% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Vengeful Strangler (Hands) 71% 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Hands S T 1d3+1d6 As for Arm 

otherwise they have no purpose or direction. In effect the sor- 
cerer ‘wears’ the body of the mummy as a proxy to perform 
some nefarious deed. 

& Guardian mummies are those inhabited and controlled by a 
spirit, which has been bound into the corpse. Depending on 
the type of spirit this means that these mummies are usually 
instinct-driven and have no real intelligence, merely a sub- 

Animated corpses, usually by sorcery or other magic, but some- conscious command which they are compelled to perform. 

times through sheer force of will, which have been subjected to & Vengeful mummies that self animate through sheer force of 

mummification processes to help preserve them in preparation for will are usually motivated to complete a specific act or task 

the afterlife. Mummies lack any functioning internal organs, and so denied to them during life. This might be revenge (on a mur- 

are essentially bone, sinew and desiccated flesh. Like most undead derer, say) or protecting their burial chattels. These fearsome 

this makes them naturally resilient to damage. mummies display the same intelligence they held in life. 

Mummies are, however, somewhat susceptible to fire. The ban- 
Mummy characteristics are based upon those of the original 

dages used in their preparation and the fluids used for embalming, 
creature, maintained intact by the act of preservation, and fur- 

are usually flammable. Any strike with a naked flame has a chance 
ther infused with an unnatural strength and vitality. They gain +2 

equal to the damage rolled of setting the creature alight. This means 
Armour Points due to the bandaging, and bonuses to STR and 

that the original damage continues to affect the hit location struck 
CON particular to the power of the magic or spirit animating them. 

cach round until extinguished, and also spreads to one adjacent hit 
The INT, POW and CHA of the mummy are based upon what 

location every round inflicting further damage. 
spirit or will currently animates it. The following statistics are for a 

There are three main types of Mummies: 
human mummy of average physical characteristics, but which has 

& Marionette mummics animated through sorcery are mere been possessed by its ancient, former soul (treated as an Intensity 3 

automatons which need to be actively controlled by the caster, Undeath Spirit). 

260



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Unless buried or armed with a weapon, human mummies typi- and in these gigantic varieties the venom is a threat to large species. 
cally attempt to grapple their opponents in close quarters (see Grap- Couple this with their ability to squirt ink, change the colour of their 
pling page 106). When possible they use the Choose Location (head) skin, regenerate tentacles, propel themselves at great speeds through 
to grab their victim’s throat and begin strangling, continuing to exert the water, and to squeeze into and through very small spaces, and 
damage each turn whilst simultaneously asphyxiating them. the giant octopus becomes a formidable predator. 

An octopus is also an intelligent creature with excellent prob- 
lem solving abilities. When attacking prey, such as creatures in boats 

OccTtoorpuuss,, GIiaAnNTt 
or creatures in the water, they are selective, and capable of using 

These monstrous cephalopods may well be the source of 
as wide a range of combat Special Effects as any sapient species, 

sea-monster tales. The giant species can range in size from the aver- 
despite having the INS characteristic. 

age 10 metre arm span of the example provided below, to colossal 
Octopuses may use their tentacles to parry attacks, using the 

monsters which can attack ships. 
squidgy limbs to entangle weapons in their grip, forcing wielders to 

Octopuses have several offensive and defensive mechanisms. 
wrestle them free with opposed Brawn rolls. Any gripped opponent 

Their eight tentacles, lined with suction cups, allow them a huge 
is either crushed in-situ or drawn towards the beak, whereupon the 

range of movement and actions; also all octopuses are venomous, 
octopus bites into the creature and injects venom with a Potency 

Octopus, Giant Attributes equal to the octopus’s Endurance. The venom paralyses the affected 
STR: 2d6+15 (22) Action Points 6 (Multi-limbed) area within one Combat Round, and then spreads to the rest of the 

CON: 2d6+12 (19) Damage Modifier ~ +1d10 body 1d3+3 rounds later. It then feeds on the paralysed specimen at 

SIZ: 2d6+21(28) Magic Points 7 leisure, dragging it into the depths. 

DEX: 2d6+15 (22) Movement 2m (land), 8m (water) 

INS: 2d6+7 (14) Initiative Bonus 18 OGgRrEe 
The term ogre refers to any giant race of ugly, bad tempered 

POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Blubbery Skin 
humanoid. Smaller than true giants but every bit as mean — if not 

Abilities Camouflaged, Formidable 
meaner — ogres tend to keep to themselves, living in hilly or forested 

Natural Weapons, Grappler, 
regions where they make their primitive settlements. Ogres even dis- 

Multi-Limbed, Regeneration 
like their own species: their sour temperaments making for solitary, 

(can grow back lost tentacles 
bile-filled individuals. A few may be cursed by chaos, but such indi- 

at its Healing Rate in Hit 
viduals are rare. 

Points per day), Swimmer, 
Whilst sapient, they have limited intellects and maintain a very 

Venomous 
primitive world-view. Many are so stupid they have reverted to bes- 

Magic None, thankfully. 
tiality and no longer understand speech. They make clothing for 
themselves but weapons and armour are either scavenged or rela- 

1d20 Location AP/HP 
tively simple (leathers, stone, wood) or improvised (such as the pro- 

01-02 Tentacle 1 1/10 
verbial ogre club — nothing more than a fashioned heavy branch or 

03-04 Tentacle 2 1/10 lump of stone fastened to a long haft). 

05-06 Tentacle 3 1/10 

07-08 Tentacle 4 1/10 Minotaur Attributes 

09-10 Tentacle 5 1/10 STR: 2d6+12(19) Action Points 2 

11-12 Tentacle 6 1/10 CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 

SIZ: 2d6+18 (25) Magic Points 11 
13-14 Tentacle 7 1/10 

DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 8m 
15-16 Tentacle 8 1/10 

INT: 2d6+3 (10) Initiative Bonus 8 (includes Initiative Penalty) 
17-18 Body 1/12 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Scraps of Fur and Leather 
19-20 Head 1/11 

CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities None 

Magic Sapient ogres may know some 

Folk Magic or Animism 
Athletics 87%, Brawn 80%, Endurance 68%, Evade 74%, Perception 61%, Stealth 

76%, Swim 71%, Willpower 54% 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Right Leg 2/9 
Combat Style & Weapons 

46 Left Leg 2/9 
Writhing Doom (Tentacles, Beak) 84% 

79 Abdomen 2/10 

10-12 Chest 2/11 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 13-15 Right Arm 2/8 

Tentacles H VL 1d8+1d10 As for Tentacle 16-18 Left Arm 2/8 

19-20 Head 2/9 
Beak M T 1d6+1d10 As for Head 

261



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

their territories. Hit and run techniques are preferred to toe to toe 
Skills 

slugging matches. 
Athletics 50%, Brawn 84%, Endurance 62%, Evade 42%, Locale 40%, Perception 

The Panthotaurs of Anathaym’s world inhabit the savannahs 
38%, Survival 53%, Track 56%, Unarmed 60%, Willpower 42% 

of the northern region, bordering the realm of the Badoshi. They 
revere the Sun Goddess Ar-Aya and, being master mathemeticians 

Combat Style & Weapons 
have built vast, stepped pyramids in her honour. Pictured below is 

Big, Hitty Things (Club) 70% 
one of the high priestesses of the Pantheris. Her collar is symbolic of 
her relationship with the sun, and marks her as a formidable theist 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage magician. 
Immense Club E VL 2d8+1d8 4/10 

PaAnNTthHOoTtaAuURr CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 
Highly intelligent ogres may subjugate tribes of lesser human- Panthotaurs can be used as player characters — although their 

oids in order to use them as slaves, or send them forth to gather solitary natures may make some aspects of integration with human 
food (although more bestial ones often face the opposite situation of characters difficult. The most social are the Leonitaurs (Lions) owing 
being captured and used as savage pets). Ogres have a reputation for to their innate social organization. Tigrisotaurs (Tigers) tend to be 
cannibalism and a taste for human flesh. This is true: they will eat the most solitary. 
whatever they can catch, and they seem to delight in catching other 
sapient species for torment and tastiness. CUuLlTtUuRrEe 

Female ogres seem to be smarter and more conniving than their Panthotaurs live in pride-like, Barbarian-level societies often 

male counterparts, being very much the brains of the relationship. matriarchal in nature. The males are typically hunters and warriors, 

This assumes, of course, that ogres form meaningful and last- but dealings with other species are handled by the females. 

ing relationships. Fables and legends often pair ogres together in 
& Customs+40%, Native Tongue+40% 

marriage which indicates that, whilst solitary, finding a partner is 
& Standard Skills: Athletics, Brawn, Endurance, Influence, 

advantageous. 
Locale, Perception, Unarmed 

& Example Combat Styles: Panthotaur Warrior, Clawed Assas- 
PaAnNTthHOoTtaAuURr sin, Silent Hunter 

These creatures are a lean combination of & Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (any Bar- 
a human with the furred head, abdomen, barian), Healing, Language (any), Lore (any), 
legs, tail and retractable claws of a large Stealth, Survival, Track 
cat — either a lion, tiger, leopard, panther 
or jaguar. Panthotaurs retain their big cat 

CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSssIioOnNSs 
ferocity and cunning and, in the case of 
lion panthotaurs, social behaviour by & Loyalty to Pride 
forming prides. Otherwise they exhibit & Love (Freedom, Hunting) 
near-human sapience. Visually they are & Hate (Chaos) 
beautiful to behold, parts of their body 
covered with a fine fur that matches 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsIioOnNSs 
the feline they are related to. 

Agent (females), Crafter, Hunter, 
Their different psychologies and 

Priest, Shaman, Warrior 
dictary requirements mean that 
panthotaurs do not mix easily with 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy 
humans and so remain apart from Panthotaur characters 
them. Occasionally humans might begin the game with commod- 
find themselves as prey but, gener- ities or currency worth 4d6 
ally, panthotaurs opt for smaller x40 silver pieces. 
game and give humans a wide- 
berth. Panthotaurs are territorial, 

occupying lands similar to their 
animal cousins (jungles, bush and 
savannah), and may even command 
prides or solitary individuals of their beast 
brethren. 

Armed with effective natural weapons 
and incredible agility, these creatures 
rarely use armour or even weapons 
beyond a simple sling or spear. 
Rather they use speed and 
stealth to hunt and defend 



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

the location. After a further hour the venom slowly breaks down the 
Panthotaur Attributes 

tissue, causing the location to additionally lose 1 Hit Point per hour, 
STR: 3d6+6 (17) Action Points 3 

which normally results in the loss of the limb (or death of the victim 
CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier — +1d4 if head or torso) unless the poison is successfully treated. If desired 
SIZ: 3d6+6 (17) Magic Points 11 the Games Master may substitute this venom with another, as the 
DEX: 2d6+12 (19) Movement 8m effects of giant scorpion venom can run a huge gamut of different 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 15 (includes Initiative Penalty) effects depending on its species (see Poisons page 74 to create new 
ones). 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Fur and Leather Kilt 
Scorpions have incredibly resilient physiologies allowing them 

CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities Intimidate, Night Sight 
to survive the most extreme environmental conditions ranging from 

Magic Specialists can learn any intense cold to extreme heat. Games Masters may therefore want 
magical discipline. to grant giant scorpions the Immunity (Cold) and Immunity (Heat) 

abilities - extending these even to resisting magical forms. 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Right Leg 1/6 
Scorpion, Giant Attributes 

4-6 Left Leg 1/6 STR: 2d6+12(19) Action Points 3 
7-9 Abdomen 2/7 

CON: 3d6+6 (17) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 
10-12 Chest 1/8 

SIZ: 2d6+15 (22) Magic Points 4 
13-15 Right Arm 1/5 

DEX: 2d6+9 (16) Movement 8m 
16-18 Left Arm 1/5 

INS: 2d6+2 (9) Initiative Bonus 13 
19-20 Head 1/6 

POW: 1d6 (4) Armour Chitin 

Abilities Adhering, Burrowing, 

Formidable Natural Weapons, 
Athletics 66%, Brawn 54%, Endurance 56%, Evade 78%, Locale 56%, Perception 

Venomous 
64%, Stealth 72%, Survival 54%, Track 56%, Unarmed 76%, Willpower 52% 

Magic None 

Combat Style & Weapons 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

Panthotaur Warrior (Sling, Spear) 76% 
01-02 Tail 6/8 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 03 Right Rear Leg 6/7 

Bite M T 1d4+1d4 As for Head 04 Left Rear Leg 6/7 

Claw M M 1d6+1d4 As for Arm 05 Mid Right Leg 6/7 

Shortspear M L 1d8+1+1d4 4/5 06 Mid Left Leg 6/7 

Sling L - 1d8+1d4 1/2 07 Fore Right Leg 6/7 

08 Tore Left Leg 6/7 

SCcOoRrPpIiOoNn,, GIiaAnNTt 09-12 Thorax 6/9 

Larger than a full grown human, giant scorpions are found 
13-15 Right Pincer 6/8 

mostly in hot, arid climates where they make their nests in caves and 
burrows, but they are natural survivors and can be found in almost 16-18 Left Pincer 6/8 

any climate. 19-20 Cephalothorax 6/10 

Scorpions have eight legs, two enlarged pincers, a long curved 
tail that finishes with a venom sac and stinger, and a segmented body Skills 
with natural armour plating. They are generally nocturnal, opportu- 

Athletics 65%, Brawn 71%, Endurance 64%, Evade 72%, Perception 53%, Stealth 
nistic predators that wait for passing prey to stray into range of their 

65%, Willpower 48% 
pincers. Whilst voracious and capable of eating large amounts in 
one sitting, they can also go without food for long spans of time. The Combat Style & Weapons 
scorpion lacks a discernible head, with its eyes, mouth and other 

Scuttling Horror (Sting, Pincers) 75% 
sensory organs located in the cephalothorax. The mouth consists 
of a pair of extremely sharp mandibles that can tear through tough Size/Force Reach Damage 

skin or armour. 
Pincer H L 1d8+1d8 As for Pincer 

The giant species has few natural predators, placing it at the top 
of its local food chain. Its venom, tough exoskeleton, and ability to Sting L VL 1d6+1d8+Venom As for Tail 

rapidly retreat to its burrow or cave makes capturing one of these 
scuttling arthropods difficult and risky. 

Scorpion venom has a Potency equal to the creature’s Endur- 
ance. It acts on the next round after injection and inflicts Agony on 

263



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

SeEaA SEerRpPeEnNTt ShHAaRrKk 
Colossal denizens of deep water — both fresh and salt — sea Sharks are consummate predators which roam the waters search- 

serpents are vast, serpentine creatures equipped with fins, a head ing for prey and are merciless in its pursuit. They will attack any- 
that is small in comparison with its body and an undulating motion thing that is helpless or panicking in the water, and are extremely 
through the water that results in a humped appearance when the sensitive to blood, allowing them to home in on prey from many 
body breaks the surface. For the most part they feed in the depths but kilometres away. 
may come to the surface to attack boats if disturbed. Once a shark tastes blood it does not stop in its attacks. Driving 

Hungry sea serpents that encounter vessels generally pluck up a a shark away is exceedingly difficult and, by the time one shark has 
few sailors, swallowing them whole until their appetite is satisfied. been deterred, another half dozen may have already arrived to join 
Some clever captains will leave livestock (or perhaps unwitting pas- the feast. 
sengers) on deck to feed a known monster in the hope it will depart 
peaceably. However, if harmed or driven to anger the creature will Shark Attributes 

reduce a ship to driftwood, drowning most of its crew in the process. STR: 2d6+18 (25) Action Points 3 

Killing such a monster is near impossible given its size and its abil- 
CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier ~ +2d6 

ity to plunge back into the depths to flee an overwhelming attack 
SIZ: 2d6+35 (42) Magic Points 7 

against it. 
DEX: 2d6+9 (16) Movement 12m (Swim) 

Sea Serpent Attributes INS: 2d6+3 (10) Initiative Bonus 13 

STR: 2d6+30 (37) Action Points 3 POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Thick Hide 

CON: 2d6+18 (25) Damage Modifier ~ +2d10 Abilities Blood Sense, Frenzy, 

SIZ: 2d6+60 (67) Magic Points 11 Swimmer 

DEX: 2d6+12 (19) Movement 8m (Swim) Magic None 

INS: 2d6+3 (10) Initiative Bonus 15 
1d20 Location API/HP 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Scales 
1-3 Tail 2/12 

Abilities Engulfing, Swimmer, 

Terrifying 4-6 Dorsal Fin 2/11 

Magic None 7-10 Hindquarters 2/13 

11-14 Torequarters 2/14 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

15-16 Right Fin 2/11 
1-3 Tail 6/19 

17-18 Left Fin 2/11 
4-5 Right Hind Fin 6/18 

19-20 Head 2/12 
6-7 Left Hind Fin 6/18 

8-10 Hindquarters 6/20 

11-14 Forequarters 6/21 Brawn 87%, Endurance 62%, Evade 52%, Perception 57%, Swim 81%, Willpower 

34% 
15-16 Right Front Fin 6/18 

17-18 Left Front Fin 6/18 Combat Style & Weapons 

19-20 Head 6/19 Jaws (Bite) 81% 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 
Skills 

Brawn 124%, Endurance 90%, Evade 58%, Perception 51%, Stealth 59%, Swim Bite E M 1d10+2d6 As for Head 

82%, Willpower 52% 

Combat Style & Weapons 
SkKEelLeEtToOnN 

Scourge of the Sea (Bite and Tail) 86% Skeletons are the remains of dead creatures whose flesh has 
long rotted away, which are subsequently animated through magic. 

Size/ Force Reach Damage 
Any kind of skeleton can be animated, and need not specifically be 

Bite C VL 1d12+2d10 As for Head bones, as even the empty husks of giant insects can be raised from 

Tail Bash C VL 1d10+2d10 As for Tail their rest. 
They are susceptible to weapons delivering blunt-trauma, which 

smashes the bone (or chitin), and disrupts the joints. Such weapons 
increase their damage dice by one step when used against skeletons 
(for example a club with 1d6 damage would become 1d8). On the 
other hand skeletons are resistant to slashing and thrusting weapons. 

264



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

strength of the animating magic), and DEX is increased by half 
Skeleton Attributes 

again — but never higher than the maximum for the species. The 
STR: 12 Action Points 3 

INT, POW and CHA of the skeleton are based upon the caster’s 
CON: 12 Damage Modifier =~ None own or the spirit that currently animates it. 
SIZ: 13 Magic Points 16 The skill values of the skeleton are equal to those of its control- 
DEX: 16 Movement 6m ler. For sorcerers and priests this is straight forward, but the skills 

INT: 11 Initiative Bonus 14 of skeletons raised by animism are dependent on the spirit. Skele- 
tons can wear armour, and wield any weapons they would naturally 

POW: 16 Armour None 
have in their previous life. The following statistics are for an average 

Abilities Undead 
human skeleton which has been possessed by an Intensity 2 Spirit 

Magic None of Undeath (see page 153). All calculations have been factored in. 
It is rumoured that the teeth of certain creatures, cursed with 

Chaos or undeath, can be buried and, with the right incantations, 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

emerge from the ground as murderous skeletons of their host form. 
1-3 Right Leg 0/5 

Of course this may simply be a myth used to terrify Meerish chil- 
46 Left Leg 0/5 

dren into cleaning their own teeth properly. Or it may have some- 
7-9 Abdomen 0/6 

thing to do with a spell formula found in the infamous Death Scrolls 
10-12 Chest 0/7 of Bhast. 
13-15 Right Arm 0/4 

16-18 Left Arm 0/4 SlLaArRgGrR 
19-20 Head 0/5 A hulking, bad-tempered, bipedal lizard, slargr inhabit forests 

and swamps and establish extensive hunting grounds, targeting 

Skills any creature smaller than themselves for food. Although omnivo- 

Athletics 68%, Brawn 45%, Endurance 44%, Evade 72%, Perception 57%, rous, slargr prefer fresh, raw meat; and despite their size are skil- 

Unarmed 68%, Willpower 72% ful yet silent ambush hunters. Their mottled grey-green skin offers 
excellent camouflage in the slargr’s natural habitat making surprise 

Combat Style & Weapons attacks common. Rather strangely, the scales which cover them are 

Skeletal Warrior (Sword, Spear, Peltast Shield) 68% thicker on the arms and head, but grow gradually thinner towards 
its tail, making it more vulnerable from the rear. 

Size/ Force Reach Damage Although they appear slow and dull-witted, they are anything 

Shortspear M L 1d8+1 4/5 but. Slargr are intelligent. Their vast, clawed hands make all but the 
simplest brute tools difficult to use, but the beasts employ rocks, tree 

Peltast Shield L S 1d4 4/12 

Shortsword M S 1d6 6/8 
Slargr Attributes 

STR: 2d6+15 (22) Action Points 2 
Reduce the damage dice of slashing weapons by one step, and 
thrusting weapons by two steps. CON: 2d6+12 (19) Damage Modifier ~ +1d10 

Similar to mummies there are several types of skeletons depend- SIZ: 2d6+18 (25) Magic Points 11 

ing on the type of magic used to animate them: DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 6m 

INT: 2d6+4 (11) Initiative Bonus 12 
& Those animated through sorcery are automatons which must 

be actively controlled by the caster, otherwise they lapse into POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Tough Scales 

quiescence. Although powerful sorcerers can control several CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities Blood Sense, Camouflaged, 
skeletons simultaneously their usefulness is limited by the con- Formidable Natural Weapons, 

centration required to direct them. Grappler 

& Skeletons raised by theism have the benefit that it is the Magic None 

supernatural entity being channelled by the priest who con- 
trols them. This can often grant the undead a semblance of 1d20 Location AP/HP 
independent action, though their skills are dependent on the 1-3 Tail 2/9 
nature of the deity or demon called upon. 

4-5 Right Hind Leg 3/9 
& Animists can send undeath spirits to possess the bones of dead 

6-7 Left Hind Leg 3/9 
creatures, granting the skeleton mental characteristics, and a 

8-10 Abdomen 3/10 
degree of free will. This strength is also a weakness since the 
animating spirit can be blocked, exorcised or destroyed by 11-14 Chest 3/11 

magic which specifically targets such entities. 15-16 Right Arm 4/8 

17-18 Left Arm 4/8 
Skeleton characteristics are based upon those of the original 

19-20 Head 4/9 
creature, but modified to reflect the loss of flesh and muscle. Their 

19-20 Head 4/9 
STR and CON are halved (but receive bonuses according to the 

265



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Skills Smilodon Attributes 

Athletics 55%, Brawn 77%, Endurance 68%, Evade 46%, Perception 62%, Track STR: 2d6+15 (22) Action Points 3 

70%, Stealth 64%, Willpower 52% 
CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d12 

SIZ: 2d6+25 (32) Magic Points 7 
Combat Style & Weapons 

DEX: 2d6+9 (16) Movement 8m 
Slargr Hunter (Claws, Jaws and Tail) 75% 

INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 15 

Weapon Size/ Force Reach Damage POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Fur and Hide 

Bite L S 1d8+1d10 As for Head Abilities Intimidate, Leaper, Night 

Sight 
Claws L M 1d8+1d10 As for Arm 

Magic None 
Thail L L 1d6+1d10 As for Tail 

1d20 Location AP/HP 
branches and other natural resources to aid in their hunting and 

1-2 Right Hind Leg 2/9 
even dig spike-lined death pits to aid in catching larger prey. 

Slargr are, generally, solitary creatures. Intensely protective 34 Left Hind Leg 2/9 

of their hunting territories, slargr cannot abide sharing with even 57 Hindquarters 2/10 
their own kind. Companionship is sought for mating purposes only, 

8-10 Torequarters 2/11 
and this happens once a year when the females become fertile and 
develop a pinkish-red sheen to their skin indicating a readiness to 11-13 Right Front Leg 2/9 

mate. At this time males compete in fights to the death for mating 14-16 Left Front Leg 2/9 
privileges, something the females encourage to ensure they will cou- 

17-20 Head 2/9 
ple with the strongest male specimen they can. 

Ostensibly bipedal, slargr will revert to all-fours when giving 
chase, thereby improving their speed. In combat they use their mass 
to overwhelm opponents, and a favoured tactic when dealing with Athletics 78%, Brawn 84%, Endurance 66%, Evade 52%, Perception 50%, Track 

weapon-using prey is to disarm the opponent first (especially shields) 66%, Stealth 69%, Willpower 44% 

before bludgeoning and rending with claws and teeth. It has been 
Combat Style & Weapons 

known for humans to reason with slargr — persuading them to pur- 
sue better or larger prey — but such opportunities are rare. A hungry Smilodon Ambush (Teeth, Claws) 78% 

slargr has only one, driving desire, and it is not to enter into polite 
Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

discourse. 
The cover of this book depicts a typical adult slargr. The creature Bite H M 1d10+1d12 As for Head 

has been stalking Anathaym for some time before making a fero- Claws L M 1d8+1d12 As for Leg 

cious, unexpected attack. 
by crushing the windpipe, a task made easier if the prey has 

SmMIilLoOdDoOnN been surprised, stabbed and then crushed under smilodon’s 
weight. 

Often known as sabre-toothed tigers, although 
Smilodon hunt in small family packs of 

this is a misnomer, these big cats are noted for 
X .\\,\\ between three and eight animals, although 

both their intimidating physical size and pro- 
> lone smilodon are also known. Their pow- 

nounced canine fangs which arch 
-3 erful forelimbs mean they are excellent 

down well below the lower jaw 
climbers, and so they make use of any 

and average around 30 centi- 
naturally high terrain to ambush their 

metres in length. Smilodon are 
incredibly robust and strong prey. 

when compared with other 
big cats — especially in their SNnAaKkEe,, GIiaAnNTt 
forequarters. The largest naturally occurring large 

Built for power rather snakes (the constrictors, such as the 
than speed, they are ambush python and anaconda) can reach huge 
hunters, using height to leap lengths. This entry describes snakes of 
down on their prey, combin- a more monstrous scale that are capable 
ing the delivery of a stabbing of swallowing prey whole and are truly 
downward thrust with their terrifying in their appearance. The vast 
incisors together with the bulk of giant snakes are non-venomous: 
impact of their sheer bulk they rely on their size and strength to 
to overwhelm their victims. catch and then kill prey without the 
Death is usually delivered need to poison it for incapacitation. Of 



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

course, for added horror, giant snakes can be made venomous as a creature of up to their own size. It takes one day per point of SIZ 
well. to fully digest the meal. 

Snakes can adapt to most habitats although, being cold-blooded, Whether they strike from ambush or hold mesmerised victims 
they are sluggish in cooler climes. They can be found anywhere from motionless whilst they approach, constrictors loop prey with their 
deserts to jungles; forests to mountains. Wherever there is enough coils and wind themselves tight, cutting off circulation and air, suffo- 
prey, giant snakes may not be far removed. All giant snakes are either cating and crushing the victim. Once the prey is dead or unconscious 
camouflaged for their environment or possess the ability to mesmer- it is swallowed whole, and digested over a long period, meaning that 
ise their prey. However, even the most brightly patterned serpents snakes can take considerable periods between meals. Escaping from 
can be difficult to detect, and because snakes often remain motion- a giant constrictor’s coils is a monumental feat requiring an opposed 
less and silent for many hours, stumbling into a snake’s path is not test of Brawn skills. 
difficult to do. Giant constrictors with the ability to mesmerise must engage 

All snakes have the inherent ability to unhinge their jaws in order the target in direct eye contact, which prompts an opposed roll of 
to ingest subdued or slain prey. However since most serpents have Willpower skills. If the victim loses, they remain motionless, unable 
a rather small head in proportion to their body length, and must to react or save themselves. The first attack of the snake against 
spend hours swallowing victim, they do not receive the Engulfing a surprised or mesmerised target (if it generates a Special Effect) 
ability in combat. Despite this minor restriction, a snake can swallow will target the chest or abdomen. No damage is inflicted but the 

attack automatically establishes a grapple. On the snake’s next turn, 
it inflicts its Damage Modifier by tightening its coils applying the 
damage to the Chest or Abdomen area directly: armour does not 

Snake, Giant Attributes 
protect against this constriction damage. Giant snakes usually keep 

STR: 3d6+9 (20) Action Points 3 
their heads out of combat unless outnumbered by opponents. 

CON: 3d6+12 (23) Damage Modifier ~ +2d6 

SIZ: 3d6+30 (41) Magic Points 7 
SPpIidDEeRr,, GIiaAnNTt 

DEX: 2d6+12 (19) Movement 8m 
Even hardened adventurers can harbour arachnophobia — the 

INS: 2d6+5 (12) Initiative Bonus 16 
fear of spiders — which makes the giant variety even more terrifying. 

POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Scales Giant spiders are excellent predators, using all manner of ingenious 

Abilities Camouflaged or Gaze Attack methods of luring and trapping prey. Whether they use concealed 

(Mesmerism), Cold Blooded, burrows (trap-door spiders), sticky webs, or are fast running hunt- 

Grappler er-killers; spiders are cunning, patient and deadly. When using a 

Magic None giant spider, decide how it hunts and use the appropriate combat 
techniques described here to run the encounter. 

1d20 Location AP/HP All giant spiders have the ability to adhere to vertical surfaces. 

1-3 Tail Tip 4/13 This means they can squat on a cave ceiling and cling to or scurry up 
a wall at great speed. They have excellent vibratory, as well as visual 

A=) Mid End-length 4/13 
perception, through the hairs on their legs, making them difficult to 

67 Tore End-length 4/13 sneak up upon unless care is taken to move extremely slowly, and not 

8-9 Rear Mid-length 4/14 disturb the silken trip lines which surround their lairs. 
Spiders pinion prey with one or more of their legs before biting 

10-12 Mid Mid-length 4/14 
with their mandibles. Provided the bite penetrates any armoun, it 

13-14 Tore Mid-length 4/14 injects venom into the victim, which has a Potency equal to the spi- 

15-16 Rear Tore-length 4/13 der’s Endurance. Games Masters are free to develop their own poi- 
sons for particular species, but as a default use the following toxin. 

17-18 Mid Fore-length 4/13 
Generic spider poison acts 1d6 rounds after injection (during 

19-20 Head 4/13 which time the spider either retreats or maintains its grip), and 
paralyses the victim if not resisted. Once immobile the spider will 
wrap the victim in silk. Paralysis lasts for a number of hours equal to 

Athletics 79%, Brawn 91%, Endurance 66%, Evade 68%, Perception 59%, Stealth one quarter of the spider’s CON. However, the venom has a more 
71%, Willpower 54% deadly secondary effect. Each hour after the initial poisoning, the 

victim loses 1 Hit Point from every location as his insides begin to 
Combat Style & Weapons liquefy. This continues until the victim is dead. 
Crushing Death (Constrict, Bite and Writhe) 79% Spider silk is incredibly strong and sticky: treat a silk binding or 

a strand of web as having 6 Armour Points, and Hit Points equal to 
Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage half the spider’s SIZ. Touching an adhesive web glues the limb to 

Bite H VL 1d8+2d6 As for Head the strand, unless the victim can win an opposed roll of their Brawn 
against the silk’s Stickiness (equal to the spider’s Endurance). If this 

Constrict E T 2d6 As for Segment 
fails they remain fastened, unable to break free by strength alone. 

Tail Slap E VL 1d6+2d6 As for Tail Attempting to cut free exposes the tool or weapon used to the same 
process. Despite popular belief, spider webs are not flammable, but 

267



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Athletics 80%, Brawn 69%, Endurance 64%, Evade 80%, Perception 53%, Stealth 

69%, Willpower 48% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Eight Legged Horror (Legs, Mandibles) 80% 

Size/Force Reach Damage 

Mandibles L T 1d6+1d10 As for Head 

Legs L VL Grapple As for Leg 

a character might slowly burn their way through a web by using a 
flame to shrivel the strands (fire damage ignores the silk’s Armour 
Points). 

Some spiders are capable of leaping disturbingly long distances 
using their powerful musculature. If designing spiders that are hunt- 
er-killers, grant them the Leaping ability to reflect this method of 
chasing down prey. 

TIigGeErR 
With the exception of smilodon, tigers are the largest of the big 

cats. Highly territorial and generally solitary (save for females with 
cubs) they frequent many different climates including arctic envi- 
ronments. Their natural camouflage, usually with the characteris- 
tic black stripes, means they can move with high stealth, increasing 
their ambush capabilities. The pattern of stripes is unique to each 
tiger, and helps the animals to conceal themselves amongst the shad- 
ows, foliage and long grass as they stalk their prey. 

Spider, Giant Attributes The chief means of attack is the powerful bite, followed by claw 
STR: 3d6+9 (20) Action Points 3 rakes. A hungry tiger is tenacious and will stalk prey for a great dis- 
CON: 3d6+6 (17) Damage Modifier  +1d10 tance if driven by an empty stomach. They are undeterred by prey 
SIZ: 3d6+18 (29) Magic Points 4 larger themselves although tbese cats are still cautious given .that - 

generally - they do not hunt in large numbers, and have little in the 
DEX: 3d6+9 (20) Movement 10m 

way of support. 
INS: 2d6+2 (9) Initiative Bonus 15 

POW: 1d6 (4) Armour Exoskeleton Attributes 
STR: 2d6+15 (22) Action Points 3 

Abilities Adhering, Earth Sense, 
Grappler, Venomous CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d10 

Magic None SIZ: 2d6+18 (25) Magic Points 7 

DEX: 2d6+12 (19) Movement 8m 

1d20 Location AP/HP INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 16 

01-02 Right Rear Leg 4/9 POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Fur and Hide 

03-04 Left Rear Leg 4/9 Abilities Camouflage, Intimidate, 

05-06 Mid Right Leg 4/9 Night Sight 
. Magic None 

07-08 Mid Left Leg 4/9 

09-10 Fore Right Leg 9 1d20 Location APIHP 
11-12 Tore Left Leg 4/9 1-2 Right Hind Leg 2/8 

13-14 Abdomen 4/12 34 Left Hind Leg 2/8 

15-16 Tront Right Leg 4/9 5-7 Hindquarters 2/9 

17-18 Tront Left Leg 4/9 8-10 Torequarters 2/10 

19-20 Cephalothorax 4/11 11-13 Right Front Leg 2/8 

14-16 Left Front Leg 2/8 

17-20 Head 2/8 

268



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

TroLlLl DAaRrKkNnEeSsSs BOoNnDd TAaBbLlEe 
Athletics 71%, Brawn 68%, Endurance 66%, Evade 68%, Perception 60%, Track 

56%, Stealth 72%, Willpower 54% 1d100 Bond Srength 

Very weak bond. Troll can function without hindrance in slightly 

Combat Style & Weapons 01-20 overcast conditions. Lesser cloud cover inflicts one level of Fatigue. 

Striped Death (Teeth, Claws) 81% Weak bond. Troll can function without hindrance in completely 

21-40 overcast conditions. Lesser cloud cover inflicts three levels of 
Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage Tatigue. 

Bite L S 1d8+1d10 As for Head 4160 Average bond. Troll incurs five levels of Fatigue in any form of 

daylight, no matter the cloud cover. 
Claws L M 1d6+1d10 As for Leg 

- Strong bond. As above, but the troll also suffers 1 Hit Point of 

damage to every location per hour. 

Troll 81-00 Very strong bond. Any form of daylight petrifies the troll in 1d6+4 

Rounds. 

Attributes 

STR: 3d6+9 (20) Action Points 2 

CON: 3d6+6 (17) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 

SIZ: 3d6+12 (23) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 8m 

INT: 2d6+3 (10) Initiative Bonus 11 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Tough, Warty Hide 

CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities Dark Sight, Immunity 

(Mundane Weapons) 

Magic Some trolls know Folk Magic 

48% (Darkness or Extinguish, 

plus 1d3 others) 

1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Right Leg 3/8 

46 Left Leg 3/8 

79 Abdomen 3/9 

10-12 Chest 3/10 

13-15 Right Arm 3/7 

16-18 Left Arm 3/7 
Having their roots in Scandinavian folklore, #oll was originally a 

pejorative term for the joinar, or giants. In time it has come to refer 19-20 Head 3/8 

to a species of ugly, brutish, peevish humanoids who live in isolation 
from humans, often dwell in caves and cavern systems, and can be 
turned to stone if struck by the sun’s rays. Trolls can be up to twice Athletics 51%, Brawn 73%, Deceit 47%, Endurance 64%, Evade 42%, Perception 

the size of a human, and are usually distinguished by their ugly, 51%, Stealth 61%, Unarmed 71%, Willpower 42% 

warty faces, oversized ears, straggling unkempt hair, a mouth full of 
tombstone-like teeth, and a tendency to eat human flesh when they 
can get it. Whilst this is true of most trolls, it is not true for all. Some Obsession with Place/Thing 95%, Loathe Billy Goats 90% 

trolls are far fairer in their appearance — although always large in 
size and stature— and their dispositions are as varied as for humans. ‘ombat Style & Weapons 

Many folk legends surround trolls, such as their ability to regen- Troll Fury (Club, Hammer, Thrown Rock) 61% 

erate the damage of any wound. Such rumours are false but have 
their basis in the fact that the hide of a troll is naturally resistant to Size/Force Reach Damage 

non-magical damage — an easy to make mistake when most battles Club (Ogre size) L M 1d8+1d8 4/10 

against trolls are performed in the dark. Despite this, they can still 
Maul E VL 1d12+3+1d8 4/10 

drown, burn or suffer injuries from wrestling. Likewise the idea that 
trolls can be driven off by loud noises is also false; rather they are Thrown Rock L - 1d6+1d8 - 

driven to rage by excessive noise which hurts their sensitive ears. 
Tists L M 1d4+1d8 As for Arm 

A peculiarity amongst trolls is possession and guardianship. Some 
trolls become absorbed with a particular fixture (such as a bridge), 

269



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

landmark (such as a tree or interestingly shaped outcrop of rocks) 
Unicorn Attributes 

or possessions (club, hammer, stolen wealth), and become obsessive 
STR: 2d6+21 (28) Action Points 3 

about its safety. Trolls caught in the grip of such an obsession always 
act aggressively when they think the subject of it is under threat, no CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +2d6 

matter how slight. Unprovoked attacks are common where a troll SIZ: 2d6+30 (37) Magic Points 19 

believes someone is after whatever it covets. DEX: 2d6+12 (19) Movement 12m 

Direct sunlight can pose problems for trolls. Some are able to INS: 2d6+7 (14) Initiative Bonus 17 

function in daylight, as long as the sky is overcast, whilst others — 
POW: 2d6+12 (19) Armour Hide 

those who with the strongest links with to darkness — are, indeed, 
Abilities Formidable Natural Weapons, 

turned to stone when struck by the sun’s rays. 
Life Sense, Trample 

This different reaction to sunlight differentiates troll species. To 
determine how a troll is affected, roll on the Troll Darkness Bond Magic None 

table (see previous page). 
1d20 Location API/HP 

1-3 Right Hind Leg 1/10 
UNnIicCoORrnN 
A pure-white horse with a long, graceful, spiralling horn emerg- 46 Left Hind Leg 1/10 

ing from the forchead, unicorns represent grace, dignity and purity. 7-9 Hindquarters 1/11 

Killing a unicorn is said to curse the killer, and only those with pure 
10-12 Torequarters 1/12 

hearts, minds and bodies can hope to approach, or tame, a unicorn. 
Those motivated by evil and chaos view unicorns as an enemy, and 13-14 Right Front Leg 1/9 

may try to seek-out the beasts for murder or torture, contributing to 15-16 Left Front Leg 1/9 

the animal’s wariness. However certain circumstances might bring a 
17-20 Head 1/10 

unicorn into the vicinity of others — usually when someone of pure 
motive and heart needs help — or certain spells. 

The unicorn’s horn is magical, possessing the power of healing. 
BAthletics 77%, Brawn 85%, Endurance 66%, Evade 78%, Perception 73%, 

If touched against an injured location, the horn restores a num- 
Stealth 73%, Willpower 78% 

ber of Hit Points equal to half the unicorn’s Magic Points and any 
disease or poison currently suffered is neutralized. Each use of this 

Combat Style & Weapons 
power diminishes the unicorn’s Magic Points by 1 so successive 

Indomitable Sentinel (Horn, Hoofs) 87% 
bouts of healing grow progressively weaker. Severed limbs cannot be 
reattached but crushed or maimed ones are restored. Such healing 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 
is performed at the will of the unicorn, which cannot be compelled 

Gore H L 1d10+2d6 As for Head 
or forced. Any virginal character can attempt to gain a unicorn’s 
help and trust through an Influence roll opposed by the creature’s Trample E T 4d6 As for Leg 

Willpower. If the character can also be considered to be pure of 
mind and spirit (and here the Games Master must decide if this 

VAaMmPpIiRrEe 
is true) then the Influence roll becomes one grade easier. All other 

Kings and queens of the undead, vampires sustain themselves 
characters have no hope of gaining a unicorn’s trust and any char- 

through drinking of blood of sapient creatures. The following type 
acter openly following or tainted by chaos immediately causes the 

of vampire is based upon European myth, but can be tweaked to fit 
unicorn to flee. 

the countless different versions of other cultures and fantasy worlds. 
A pure character who critically succeeds in gaining a unicorn’s 

The manner of becoming a vampire depends on the campaign. 
trust also gains its love. This forms a Passion between the two which 

In some settings vampirism may be the rare result of a curse, posses- 
can be used for securing aid or help in the future. Securing that 

sion or deliberate self transformation. In others vampirism may be a 
unicorn’s help becomes automatic, and gaining the help of other 

contagious disease which affects anyone bitten by one of these mon- 
unicorns becomes one grade casier. 

sters. Many superstitions surround the creation of vampires, and 
If killed a unicorn’s horn retains some of its healing abilities. If 

thus the real cause may remain obfuscated. About the only thing 
ground into a powder (one horn creates 1d6+3 doses), and ingested 

which is definitively known is that vampirism only affects sapient 
it cures any disease or poison. However, killing a unicorn results in 

species. 
a curse for the killer. The exact nature is up the Games Master to 
decide but it can include Luck Points failing to regenerate, no natu- 
ral healing, development of a disease or deformity, and so on. 

The horn is considered a magical weapon with which the uni- 
corn can parry attacks, but it only uses it this way if cornered or 
unable to canter. By preference a unicorn charges, if possible, tram- 
pling its victim on the way through. 

270



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

When raised as a vampire, the creature receives the following 
Vampire Attributes 

benefits: 
STR: 3d6x2 (22) Action Points 3 

& The vampire gains the Undead ability, rendering it immune CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier ~ +1d4 

to the detrimental effects of most injuries and the affects of SIZ: 2d6+6 (13) Magic Points 11 
Fatigue, save for that lost by not feeding (see below). 

DEX: 3d6x2 (22) Movement 6m 
& The vampire is infused by an unholy strength and speed. 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 18 
Multiply STR and DEX by two. 

& The vampire’s natural weapons are augmented by the growth POW: 3d6 (11) Armour None 

of fangs and iron hard finger nails, if the species did not CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Allergy (Sunlight), Darksight, 

already possess something similar. Gaze Attack (Domination), 

& The vampire becomes immune to most non-magical attacks, Immunity (Mundane 

its flesh instantly re-knitting together or invulnerable unless Weapons), Undead, Vampiric, 

specifically decapitated in a single blow — although it can still Vulnerable (Special) 

be destroyed by burning, drowning or exposure to sunlight. Magic Some may retain the magical 

& The vampire gains a gaze attack with the power to dominate skills possessed in life. 

sapient and animal victims. The vampire must spend a Magic 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

Point on his turn and engage the target in an opposed Will- 
power roll. If the victim loses it falls under the control of the 1-3 Right Leg 0/5 

vampire’s will (see below). 46 Left Leg 0/5 

& The vampire might also develop an alternate form (roll on the 
7-9 Abdomen 0/6 

Vampire Shape-Shift table). This form gains the same immu- 
nities as its normal form, but provides it with alternate senses 10-12 Chest 0/7 

and means of locomotion. Shape-Shifting requires a success- 13-15 Right Arm 0/4 

ful Willpower roll to initiate, and takes 1d3 combat rounds to 
16-18 Left Arm 0/4 

complete. It costs at least 1 Magic Point to shape-shift and 1 
point per hour thereafter to maintain the form. 19-20 Head 0/5 

In return, vampires exhibit certain weaknesses, as follows: 

Athletics 74%, Brawn 65%, Deceit 54%, Endurance 62%, Evade 64%, Influence 
& The need to consume blood weekly. For each week it does not 

62%, Perception 54%, Seduction 64%, Stealth 75%, Unarmed 84%, Willpower 
feed, the vampire suffers a level of Fatigue which does not 

62% 
recover until it feeds again; each victim (who must be drained 
to death) reducing its Fatigue level by one. If the vampire 

Passions 
drops to the level of Comatose they enter a state of suspended 

Covet Power 95%, Love to Seduce 90%, Abhor Life 80% 
animation, but do not die. 

& Susceptibility to sunlight, suffering 1d6 damage per round to 
Combat Style & Weapons 

each location it contacts. 
Generally fights using Unarmed 

& Catatonic sleepers, vampires find it difficult to awaken if dis- 
turbed during the hours of daylight. Consequently they try to 

Size/Force Reach Damage 
find remote and easy to secure lairs. 

Bite M T 1d4+1d4 As for Head 
& Vulnerability to impaling weapons of a particular type of 

wood (ash or hawthorne for example). Tists M S 1d3+1d4 As for Arm 

All other superstitions concerning vampires, such as its dislike of 
Perhaps the most frightening power of vampires is their ability 

garlic or lack of reflection, are merely folklore, and need not have 
to dominate victims, turning folk into unwitting servants for the 

any basis in truth, although a fun concept would be a newly raised 
creature. Although this power requires direct eye contact and the 

vampire who believes that they are true. investment of a Magic Point, which the vampire does not recover 
Vampires are fearsome opponents. In combat they are almost until he lets the domination drop, until that time the victim can be 

unstoppable without magical weapons or offensive spells, although 
controlled anywhere within a range of the vampire’s POW in kilo- 

for some reason their neck is vulnerable to decapitation if the blow 
metres. Whilst the victim may remain at the beck and call of its 

does twice the Hit Points of the head in a single strike. 
master, the vampire must actually concentrate to the exclusion of all 

Impaling weapons made of certain types of wood can harm a 
else to actively control one of its servitors. 

vampire, bypassing their natural immunity to mundane weapons. 
Vampires do not normally feed during the midst of combat. 

These however do not actually kill the vampire, but instead prevent 
However, if pressed, they can drain a victim of blood in a matter 

it from instantly regenerating the damage inflicted upon it. A head- 
of moments, sucking one level of Fatigue per Round until inter- 

less spear, arrow or crosshow bolt which both Impales and inflicts 
rupted or the victim is dead. Usually vampires prefer to take their 

a Major Wound, renders that particular location immobile. If this 
time drinking rather than glutting themselves. 

is the head or chest the vampire becomes quiescent. Removing the Japanese and Malaysian myths have similar vampiric forms 
stake allows the creature to rise again. (the rokuro-kubi and penanngglan respectively). These vampiric 

271



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

VAaMmPpIiRrEe SHhAaPpEeSsHhIiFfTt TAaBbLlEe 
Winged Ape Attributes 

1d100 Alternate Form STR: 2d6+12 (19) Action Points 3 

01-75 None. The vampire cannot shape-shift. CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 

76-80 Wolf (use all physical characteristics for the wolf entry). SIZ: 2d6+15 (22) Magic Points 11 

81.85 Bat (becomes a bat-like monstrosity but retains its original SIZ. It DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 4m (land), 8m (flying) 
gains the Flying ability and Fly skill). 

INS: 2d6+7 (14) Initiative Bonus 14 
. Swarm of Rats (becomes a pack of rats which can scatter in all 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Fur 
directions to eventually coalesce at a later time). 

91.95 Gaseous (becomes non-corporeal and can, in its mist-like form, pass Abilities Diving Strike, Flying, 

Formidable Natural Weapons 
through any gap permitting the flow of air). 

96-100 Roll Twice —ignoring this result if rolled again. Magic None 

creatures detach their heads from their bodies, somtimes dragging 1d20 Location AP/HP 

their entrails with them and take to the night skies to hunt fresh 1-3 Right Leg 2/8 

blood. At daybreak they return to their bodies and reform, with 4-6 Left Leg 2/8 
daily life continuing as normal. 

7-9 Abdomen 2/9 
Using these kinds of undead in MYTHRAS means adjusting the 

hit locations slightly: 01-15 strikes the entrails and 16-20 strikes the 10 Chest 2/10 

head. The creatures have the Flying ability and all other relevant 11-12 Right Wing 0/8 
abilities for traditional vampires. 

13-14 Left Wing 0/8 
A rokuro-kubi or penanngglan may not even be aware of what 

happens to them after sunset, living relatively normal lives during 15-16 Right Arm 2/7 

daylight hours. 
17-18 Left Arm 2/7 

19-20 Head 2/8 
WIiNnGgEeDd APpEe 

Winged apes resemble silverback gorillas save for the pair of Skills 
huge, bat-like wings sprouting from the shoulders, giving them flight. Athletics 62%, Brawn 71%, Endurance 62%, Evade 46%, Fly 62%, Perception 
Despite being flying creatures they are primarily ground-dwellers, 55%, Willpower 52% 

using their flight simply to chase prey, move short distances quickly 
and intimidate others. They lack the strength to maintain sustained Combat Style & Weapons 

flight or even take off without a running start; often requiring a high Rip Apart (Fists, Teeth, Wing Strike) 72% 
place from which to launch themselves. 

Winged apes frequent hilly, mountainous and jungle areas, often Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 
finding homes in ancient, overgrown ruins. They are omnivorous 

Bite M T 1d3+1d8 As for Head 
but follow a largely herbivorous 

diet, seeking meat only on TFists M M 1d4+1d8 As for Arm 

. rare  occasions. Wing M L 1d3+1d8 As for Wing 

oy That said, if 
' an intruder is They form groups of between 10 and 30 individuals with a strong 

- f and aggressive male as the pack leader, and supplemented by several 
L] 

strong beta males. The alpha male has the privilege of mating 
" H,_‘H \%“\ with all the females in the pack and other males must wait 

their turn or challenge the alpha male for breeding rights. 

 WWoorlrf 
g Oldest of the canine species and feared 

pack-hunters, wolves are native to temper- 
ate and sub-arctic climates, preferring for- 

ests, hills and moorland. A pack consists of 
between 12 and 30 wolves led by an alpha 

male — usually the strongest of the pack but often 
killed, 

the oldest. The pack hierarchy is incredibly strong; most individ- 
winged apes will happily 

ual wolves are subservient to the alpha male and challengers to the 
feed on the carcass. 

position are set-upon by the others. Any male that beats the leader 
The apes are highly ter- 

generally assumes the alpha position, and may drive out the loser (if 
ritorial and extremely aggres- 

death does not result) or the loser may assume a life of subservience 
sive to those who their territory. 

to the new leader, thereby retaining a place in the community. 

272



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

any dog, use those for the wolf (which is the progenitor of all canine 
Attributes 

breeds), and adjust the physical statistics (STR, SIZ and DEX) 
STR: 1d3+6 (8) Action Points 2 

accordingly. All dogs are pack animals that choose a leader (even if 
CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier ~ -1d2 this is considered to be a human owner) and, if kept in a pack, will 
SIZ: 1d3+6 (8) Magic Points 7 exhibit wolf-like pack tendencies at some stage. 
DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 8m 

INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 12 LyYcCaAnNtThHrRoOPpYy 
Lycanthropy is the condition that transforms a human into a 

POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Fur 
wolf form through some appropriate environmental trigger (full 

Abilities Night Sight moon, for example). Any character struck by lycanthropy trans- 

Magic None forms into a wolf of a SIZ similar to the human form, but replacing 
INT with INS. STR, CON, DEX and POW is the higher of the 
human or wolf form, as are the listed skills. Some lycanthropes also 

1d20 Location AP/HP gain immunity to mundane damage, but retain a vulnerability, silver 
1-2 Right Hind Leg 1/4 being their traditional weakness. 

34 Left Hind Leg 1/4 The wolf form lasts for a number of hours equal to the lycan- 
thrope’s CON. The transformation process takes 1d3 minutes and is 

5-7 Hindquarters 1/5 
excruciatingly painful. 

8-10 Forequarters 1/6 

11-13 Right Front Leg 1/4 WYyRrMm// WYyVvEeRrNn 
14-16 Left Front Leg 1/4 Wyrms and wyverns are draconic entities that have serpentine 

bodies, a fierce, dragon-like head and wings. The only difference 
17-20 Head 1/4 

between the two is that wyrms lack any legs, whereas wyverns pos- 
sess a set of hind legs. The wings in both species are too small to 
sustain flight over long distances which mean they normally traverse 

Athletics 59%, Brawn 36%, Endurance 62%, Evade 52%, Perception 60%, Track terrain by either wriggling or hop about with long, leaping bounds. 
64%, Willpower 44% 

Neither creature has the intelligence of a dragon, being mere 
predatory beasts. They lack a breath weapon but make up for this 

Combat Style & Weapons 
with savage ferocity and imposing size. They are found in a diverse 

Pack Savage (Bite) 59% range of terrain, favouring hilly and moorland regions although 
both can be found in forests, jungles or swamps making their lairs 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 
in deep burrows. Wyrms are capable of hugging the ground and 

Bite S T 1d4-1d2 As for Head 

Wolves are most active at night but can be roused to activity 
during the day. Hunting expeditions are highly co-ordinated affairs. m/Wyvern Attributes 

A pack chooses and stalks its prey carefully and attacks, when they STR: 2d6+18 (25) Action Points 3 

happen, consist of successive waves of between three and six ani- CON: 2d6+12 (19) Damage Modifier ~ +2d6 

mals aiming to incapacitate the prey before tearing out the throat or SIZ: 4d6+30 (44) Magic Points 11 
cutting off air at the windpipe. The alpha male feeds first, followed 

DEX: 2d6+12 (19) Movement 8m (land), 16m (flying) 
by the remainder of the pack in an established order. The youngest 

INS: 2d6+5 (12) Initiative Bonus 16 
members of a pack may have to make do with scraps. 

In combat wolves rely on their powerful bite rather than their POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Scales 

claws. Once a bite takes hold the wolf locks its jaws, and continues Abilities Cold Blooded, Dark Sight, 

to exert pressure through the canines and by vigorously shaking the Flying, Frenzy 

head, deepening and lengthening the bites. Wolves therefore tend Magic None 

to choose the Grip and Choose Location Special Effects (always 
aiming for an exposed area). A Gripped victim sustains biting dam- Wyrm Wyvern Location AP/HP 

age throughout the duration of the grip as the wolf worries at the 1-4 1-3 Tail 6/12 
wound. 

- 4-5 Right Hind Leg 6/13 
If the alpha male is forced to flee then the pack follows suit, 

although braver individuals may attempt to gain status by remaining - 6-7 Left Hind Leg 6/13 

to fight. 5-8 8-10 Hindquarters 6/14 
Dire wolves are much larger specimens; double STR and SIZ. 

9-12 11-14 Forequarters 6/15 
Canines have been domesticated for as long as man has lived in 

settlements. Being relatively easy to train, tame and breed, it has led 13-15 15-16 Right Wing 6/13 

to a vast range of types, sizes and shapes. As well as being treated as 16-18 17-18 Left Wing 6/13 
pets or house-dogs, most dogs have been put to work in some capac- 

19-20 19-20 Head 6/14 
ity: hunting, guarding, herding and so on. If you need statistics for 

273



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

is converted to INS. In addition it usually carries the disease 
Skills 

which caused its own transformation. To make this type scar- 
Athletics 64%, Brawn 89%, Endurance 78%, Evade 68%, Fly 74%, Perception 

ier, treat Zombie Plague as a mundanely incurable disease 
63%, Willpower 62% 

with a Potency of 80%. Anyone bitten by the zombie must 
make an opposed roll of their Endurance versus the potency. 

Combat Style & Weapons 
Tailure to beat the plague means that they begin to rot before 

Draconic Terror (Bite, Tail Sweep) 84% 
they die; losing characteristic points at a rate of one per hour. 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage After 1d6 hours they expire from the disease and minutes 
later arise as a zombie. 

Bite E L 1d12+2d6 As for Head 

Tail E VL 1d10+2d6 As for Tail The following statistics are for an average human zombie created 
by zombie plague, arising from death two hours after infection. 

slithering, snake-like, to stalk prey. Wyverns are less discreet, relying Average zombies are often little threat unless they mob oppo- 

on frontal assaults. nents using superior numbers, are equipped with armour and weap- 

In the following table, Hit Location ranges have been included ons, or carry zombie plague. 

for both creatures. Zombies created through magic need no sustenance. Those 

An aquatic form of the wyvern exists, replacing the hindquarters created by plague or contagion may need to consume blood, flesh, 

and tail with the fins and tail of an enormous fish. The sea-wyvern hearts or brains to remain functional. These zombies are driven by 

gains the Aquatic ability and Swim at 74%. hunger and may possess the Life Sense ability to help them hunt. 

Zombie Attributes 
ZOoMmBbIiEe STR: 3d6-2 (9) Action Points 2 

Any recently deceased corpse animated through magic or some 
CON: 3d6-2 (9) Damage Modifier ~ -1d2 

exotic plague is a zombie. Mindless, decaying and driven by a desire 
to consume flesh and blood, zombies have no intellect to speak of. SIZ: 2d6+6-2 (11) Magic Points 0 

Magically created zombies are often under the control of a caster in DEX: 3d6-2 (9) Movement 6m 

a similar way to Skeletons (see pages 264-265). INS: 2d6+6-2 (11) Initiative Bonus 10 

The freshness of the original corpse at the time of its animation POW: 3d6-2 (9) Armour None 
defines much of a zombie’s toughness. Their characteristics start 

CHA: 3d6-2 (9) Abilities Undead 
as equivalent to the creature in life, but (assuming no burial) are 
reduced by one point for each day which passes after death before Magic Some may retain the magical 

it is raised. Once animated a zombie does not normally rot any fur- skills possessed in life. 

ther, but retains its foul stench. 
1d20 Location API/HP 

Of course the rate of the initial degeneration depends on the 
1-3 Right Leg 0/4 

environment. In cold or subterrancan climates the rate may slow 
down to one point per week; whilst places like bogs or glaciers may 4-6 Left Leg 0/4 

preserve corpses indefinitely. However quickly it deteriorates, once 79 Abdomen 0/5 
a corpse has lost half of its STR or CON what remnants of flesh 

10-12 Chest 0/6 
remain will simply slough oft the underlying bones. From this point 
the body can only be raised as a skeleton. 13-15 Right Arm 0/3 

Zombies are relentless in whatever task assigned to them and 16-18 Left Arm 0/3 
pursue it tirelessly. As per the Undead trait they are not subject to 

19-20 Head 0/4 
fatigue. Neither are they unduly affected by damage, and the only 
thing that will stop a zombie from moving is to destroy either the 
head or chest (whichever of the two the animating magic or disease 

Athletics 38%, Brawn 40%, Endurance 58%, Evade 38%, Perception 40%, 
is primarily located) by reducing it to a Major Wound. Thus fresh 

Unarmed 58%, Willpower 48% 
corpses can be quite difficult to put down, whereas badly rotted ones 
are rather vulnerable. 

To create a zombie take a creature, decide the nature of its unlife, 
Passions 

and zombify it. 
Brains... 99% 

& Magically raised zombies take on the mental characteristics 
Combat Style & Weapons 

and physical skills of the caster or spirit controlling the body. 
Note that some methods of animating zombies can grant Generally fights using Unarmed 

the corpse bonuses to their deteriorated characteristics. In 
Size/Force Reach Damage 

addition they can wear armour and wield any weapons they 
would naturally have in their previous life. Bite S T 1+Discase As for Head 

& A zombie created by some virulent plague is an autonomous TFists S S 1d3-1d2 As for Arm 
creature, retaining the physical skills and degenerated men- 
tal characteristics of the original being, but any INT value 

274



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

CHhAaOoSs FEeaATtuURrEeSs 
Certain creatures are tainted by Chaos, which warps and alters 

natural forms in subtle and not-so-subtle ways. Creatures so tainted 
may have one or more Chaos Features, chosen to fit the recipient or 
rolled randomly: 

CHhAaOoSs FEeaATtuURrEeSs 

1d100 Feature Effect 

Possesses a flesh dissolving acidic ichor which sprays whenever the skin is damaged, causing damage to the attacker; roll 1d4 to determine the 
01-02 Acidic 

strength of the acid, 1=1d2, 2=1d4, 3=1d6 and 4=1d8 damage per wound. 

Produces pheromones which attract and seduce victims. The creature gains the Seduction skill at POW x5%. It can be resisted using 
03-04 Alluring 

Willpower as per any Seduction. 

One half of the creature is larger, longer or taller than the other, double the Hit Points for locations in the larger side and halve the Hit Points 
05-06 Asymmetric 

of locations for the smaller. 

The creature possesses resilient, malleable cartilage rather than bone. It can squeeze through any size of gap and takes no damage from any 
07-08 Boneless 

fall. 

Sensory organs are distributed over the entire body and sentience is located elsewhere — but not in the head. The brain is found in a random 
09-10 Brainless 

location. 

11-12 Burning The creature seethes with chaotic heat, injuring anyone within Short range; roll a d4, 1=1d2, 2=1d4, 3=1d6 and 4=1d8 damage per round. 

13-14 Chameleon Naturally blends with its surroundings and has an effective Stealth skill of 100%+POW. 

15-16 Climbing Gains the Adhering Ability. 

Inflicts a virulent disease with a delay of 1d8 hours and potency of CONx5%, which reduces a random characteristic byld8 points: roll a d6, 
17-18 Contagious 

1=STR, 2=CON, 3=DEX, 4=INT, 5=POW or 6=CHA. 

19-20 Corroding Weapons sustain 1d8 damage each time they strike the creature. Weapon Armour Points offer no protection. 

All magical effects within the creature’s POW in metres are suppressed by 1d8 Magnitude. Spells reduced to zero Magnitude are dispelled 
Dampener 

unless part of a permanent enchantment. 

Drains the vitality of nearby plants and creatures. Those in Short range of the creature must succeed in an unopposed Endurance roll each 
Deathly 

round to avoid suffering 1 point of damage to every Hit Location, ignoring armour. 

Creature is covered with unsettling forms, such as miniature arms, multiple eyes or mouths, writhing pseudopods, etc. Viewers must succeed in 
Disturbing 

an unopposed Willpower test or be helpless with horror until they can make the roll successfully. 

27-28 Domineering Manipulates those around it with mental commands, which cannot be resisted unless the target is successful in an unopposed Willpower test. 

29-30 Draining Temporarily weakens the magical power of an opponent, draining 1d8 MP with each successful strike. 

Produces a buzzing noise that sedates listeners. All within the creature’s POW x5 in metres must succeed in an unopposed Willpower roll to 
31-32 Droning 

avoid falling asleep for 1d8 minutes. 

Restricts the movements of those within melee range, who must succeed in an unopposed Brawn roll to avoid being rendered physically 
33-34 Entangle 

helpless each round. 

35-36 Trightening Creature appears terrifyingly dangerous; viewers must succeed in an unopposed Willpower roll or flee the creature immediately. 

37-38 Tey Radiates freezing waves of cold, injuring anyone within melee range; roll 1d4, 1=1d2, 2=1d4, 3=1d6 and 4=1d8 damage per round. 

39-40 Intangible Moves through solid objects as though non-corporeal. Whilst intangible it cannot be harmed, but neither can it attack. 

41-42 Leaper Has powerfully sprung limbs, multiplying its jump range by a factor of 1d4+1. 

43-44 Levitating Hovers above the ground giving it the ability to move over any surface without sinking or leaving tracks. 

Assumes the shape of a creature it successfully touches, maintaining its own Characteristics, but mimicking the locations and appearance of 
45-46 Mimic 

the being contacted. 

47-48 Mournful Appearance is sad or pathetic. Observers must succeed in an unopposed Willpower roll to be able to begin attacking it. 

Roll a random location and remove it from the creature. It no longer has this location, but it still functions perfectly well without it, even 
49-50 Mutated 

defying logic. 

51-52 Nerveless Does not feel any pain and ignores the effects of Serious Wounds. 

53-54 Neutralising Any spells cast at the creature are immediately neutralized. 

Produces a cloud of mist, spores or darkness that blinds observers. Those affected must succeed in an unopposed Perception roll every turn to 
55-56 Obfuscating 

see the creature. 

57-58 Oversized One location is swollen doubling its Hit Points. 

59-60 Paralysing Renders victims incapable of movement; those touched must succeed in an unopposed Endurance roll to avoid 1d8 minutes of paralysis. 

Possesses an odd primary sense; roll a d6, 1=Echolocation (sonar), 2=Thermoception (heat), 3=Cerebralception (sapient consciousness), 

61-62 Perceptive 4=Nociception (pain), 5=Ethoception (souls), 6=Thaumaception (magic). The creature does not rely on sight to perceive others and may lack 

eyes. 

275



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

CHhAaOoSs FEeaATtuURrEeSs 

1d100 Feature Effect 

. One unarmed attack inflicts a venomous poison with a delay of 1d8 rounds and a potency of CONx5%, which inflicts a Poison Condition 
63-64 Poisonous 

selected from page 75. 

65-66 Pol h Changes shape every round, maintaining its Characteristics, but assuming the locations of the new form and carrying over any damage 
- m 

Ol already suffered (Games Masters should prepare various forms in advance). 

67-68 Project Any damage inflicted on the creature is felt by anyone within POW metres, who suffer the psychological, but not physical effects as if they 
- rojector 

) had been wounded too. 

69-70 Quick Movement rate is multiplied by a factor of 1d4+1. 

71-72 Reflecting All magic cast on the creature is reflected back against the caster. 

73-74 Regenerating Recovers 1 Hit Point per round to every location, unless the creature has suffered a Major Wound in the injured location. 

75.76 Roari Produces a thunderous roar, deafening listeners, who must succeed in an unopposed Endurance roll to avoid becoming temporally stunned 

) i for 1d3 Turns. 

77-78 Scintillating Possesses a shifting chromatic aura that confuses onlookers. All attacks against the creature are one grade harder. 

The creature absorbs the ambient light in its immediate surroundings, creating a pool of total darkness with a radius equal to POW in 
79-80 Shadowy 

metres. 

8189 Shocki Charges itself with electricity, inflicting a shock on those that hit it (if using metal or uninsulated weapons, or are struck by it; roll 1d4, 
- ocking 

3 1=1d2, 2=1d4, 3=1d6 and 4=1d8 damage per blow). 

83-84 Silent Completely inaudible — even its attacks. 

85-86 Slimy Cannot be grappled or gripped in close combat. The creature leaves a sticky mucus trail wherever it travels. 

87-88 Stench Releases nauseating odours that sicken inhalers, who must succeed in an unopposed Endurance roll to avoid uncontrollable vomiting for 1d3 
- 1 

ene Combat Rounds. 

89-90 Sticky Secretes a strong glue or mucus which causes items to stick to its skin, requiring a successful unopposed Brawn roll and a Combat Action to 
- ic 

free. 

91-92 Teleporter Can freely teleport to a new location once per round. The location must be within a number of metres equal to POW x2. 

Changes the substance of organic material it touches into another substance; living victims must succeed in an unopposed Endurance roll to 
93-94 Transmuter . . . . . 

avoid the struck location being changed into crystal, dust, stone, wine, bronze and so on. 

95-96 Vampiric Hit Point damage inflicted on an opponent is transferred to itself, healing any wounds currently suffered. 

97-98 Warded Invulnerable to one specific type of material; steel, wood, stone, flesh, etc. 

99-100 Weakening Temporarily reduces the STR of an opponent by 1d8 each successful (undefended) hit. 

NoNn-HumAaNn HiiTt 

LoOCcAaTtIioONnSs 
The tables in this section are for Games Masters who enjoy creat- 

ing their own creatures - or when a character might, through magic, 
be transmogrified into something else. 

Arachnid Centaurid 
1d20 Location 1d20 Location Location Location 

1-2 Right Rear Leg 1-3 Right Leg 1-2 Tail 1 Right Rear Leg 

3-4 Left Rear Leg 4-6 Left Leg 3-4 Right Hind Leg 2 Left Rear Leg 

5-6 Mid Right Leg 7-8 Hindquarters 5-6 Left Hind Leg 3 Right Middle Leg 

7-8 Mid Left Leg 9-10 Forequarters 7-8 Hindquarters 4 Left Middle Leg 

9-10 Tore Right Leg 11-12 Right Front Leg 9-10 Right Wing 5-9 Abdomen 

11-12 Tore Left Leg 13-14 Left Front Leg 11-12 Left Wing 10-13  Thorax 

BRI domen 15-16 Chest 13-14 Forequarters 14 Right Front Leg 

. 17 Right Arm 15-16 Right Front Leg 15 Left Front Leg 

15-16  Front Right Leg - Lol o 1718 Left Front Leg 1620  Head 
17-18 Tront Left Leg 19-20 Head 19-20 Head 

19-20 Cephalothorax 

276



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Dorsal Finned Aquatic Pachyderm Serpentine Tailed Arachnid 

1d20 Location 1d20 Location 1d20 Location 1d20 Location 

1-3 Tail 1-2 Right Hind Leg 13 Tail Tip 1-2 Tail 

4-6 Dorsal Fin 3-4 Left Hind Leg 4-5 Mid End-length 3 Right Rear Leg 

7-10 Hindquarters 5-8 Hindquarters 6-7 Fore End-length 4 Left Rear Leg 

11-14 Torequarters 9-12 Forequarters 8-9 Rear Mid-length 5 Mid Right Leg 

15-16 Right Fin 13-14  Right Front Leg 10-12 Mid Mid-length 6 Mid Left Leg 

17-18 Left Fin 15-16  Left Front Leg 13-14 Fore Mid-length 7 Tore Right Leg 

19-20 Head 17 Trunk 15-16 Rear Fore-length 
8 Tore Left Leg 

18-20  Head 17-18 Mid Fore-length 
9-12 Thorax 

Tailed Biped 19-20  Head 
13-15  Right Pincer 

1d20 Location 
Tailed Quadruped, 

1-3 Tail 16-18 Left Pincer 
1d20 Location Winged Biped 

4-5 Right Leg 
1-3 Tail 19-20 Cephalothorax 

1d20 Location 
6-7 Left Leg 4-5 Right Hind Leg 1-3 Right Leg 
8-10 Abdomen 6-7 Left Hind Leg 4-6 Left Leg 

Winged Insect 
11-14 Chest 8-10 Hindquarters 7-9 Abdomen 
15-16  Right Arm 1d20 Location 

11-14  Torequarters 10 Chest 
1 Right Rear Leg 

17-18 Left Arm 15-16  Right Front Leg 11-12 Right Wing 
2 Left Rear Leg 

17-18 Left Front Leg 
19-20  Head 13-14 Left Wing 

19-20  Head 3-4 Metathorax 
15-16 Right Arm 

5 Mid Right Leg 

17-18 Left Arm 6 Mid Left Leg 
Winged Quadruped 

7-10 Prothorax 
1d20 Location 19-20 Head 

1-2 Right Hind Leg 11-12 Right Wing 

3-4 Left Hind Leg 13-14 Left Wing 
5-7 Hindquarters 

15-16 Right Forelimb 
8-10 Forequarters 

11-12 Right Wing 17-18 Left Forelimb 

13-14  Left Wing 
19-20 Head 

15-16  Right Front Leg 

17-18  Left Front Leg 

19-20  Head 



