Mythras:  Cults & Brotherhoods

| G S | I R K K & M w =AW 

Cults & 
Brotherhoods

| mfi 
| G B | SR TR > > 

><> >z 
> Yy K« &« K [ AL TSR = B <Q i 

defining feature of MYTHRAS is its emphasis on mem- 

A bership of a cult — an organisation channelling belief, Cuurlrts 
behaviour and worship — to facilitate community and char- Cults are organisations which provide a formalised method of 

acter progression. As an evolution to this tradition, Brotherhoods worship or the teaching of magic. The nature of a cult is dependent 
have been included, being akin to cults but with an emphasis on on its focus of veneration. In MYTHRAS this reflects one of the higher 
professional, rather than religious or magically esoteric, fellowships magical disciplines: animism, mysticism, sorcery or theism. Animists 

Joining a cult or brotherhood depends entirely upon the cam- venerate the spirits and the spirit world; mystics venerate a particular 
paign setting. The Games Master need not include such organisa- form of teaching which leads to greater understanding and enlight- 
tions at all, but to leave them out overlooks their potential as a tool enment; sorcerers venerate the sorcerous principles they practice; 
to guide character development, and create bonds of social respon- theists worship a god or gods hoping to achieve a deeper and more 
sibility, camaraderie and even passions — all of which can be used to meaningful relationship with their deity. 
craft plots and adventures within the campaign. In most respects all cults work in a similar way. A series of ranks 

If they are to be included Games Masters should weave Cults within the cult mark depth of progression, knowledge and achieve- 
and Brotherhoods deeply into the cultures of his world. They should ment. The highest ranks lead and guide the lower ranks, and are 
be a fundamental aspect of everyday life just as religion, social clubs, party to the cult’s most formidable powers and deepest secrets. The 
and professional guilds still are today. Membership of such organisa- lowest ranks generally provide support for the cult in return for 
tions mould the opportunities and contacts provided to a character, mutual support, protection, and sometimes magical aid. Most never 
or conversely block advancement, and colour social opinion of them bother to advance up the cult ranks, and are happy to stay there, 
if they are not members. Thus they can be a powertul tool to hinder having no aspirations towards personal greatness, but simply seeking 
or reward characters, and naturally provide a welter of plot twists to asense of religious or philosophical fulfilment. 
a Games Master with little or no effort on his part. 

& Cults emphasise faith, spiritualism and philosophical prac- 
Although the terms are somewhat interchangeable, Cults are 

tices. They are focused upon the metaphysical. 
organisations which pursue active religious veneration or magical 

& Cults offer access to magic, but usually restrict its teaching 
powers as one of their key features; whereas Brotherhoods do not 

to more dedicated or professional members of higher rank. 
offer magical abilities (unless, of course, one creates a magical broth- 

However, those of the lowest ranks are normally permitted to 
erhood) but compensate with other facilities and resources focused 

petition senior members to cast magic on their behalf. 
more on career development. 

& Cult membership is very often open to all members of soci- 
Nothing prevents membership of several Cults and Brother- 

ety, but the higher ranks are vocational in their own right. 
hoods, unless they have been specifically denoted as being mutually 

Thus everyone in a tribe might be a member of the common 
exclusive in that setting. Both types of organisation add depth and 

totemic cult, but only those who dedicate themselves to the 
considerable opportunities for roleplaying:, and as we know from the 

path of the shaman can progress up the cult ranks. 
real world, cults, brotherhoods and secret societies abound — a key 

& Cults often have strictures on how their members demon- 
part of human social development and belonging. 

strate their veneration, with regular services, rituals, festivals, 
and the like. 

& Cults sometimes have restrictions about how and when they 
may be joined, and limitations upon later advancement. 
Membership may be limited to those of a certain age, passing 

192



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

a particular a rite of passage, being born to a certain caste, ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
and so on. Myceras 1s the patron god of Meeros. He s the guardian of its defenders, 

& Cults are usually an inherent part of communities and cul- and the strength of s walls, and all citizens off ree birth are inducted to his 
tures, subject to their social restrictions. worship when they serve in the city’s civic army. Only those who fulfil their 

malitary service are permatted to vote, thus the Cult of Myceras holds a posi- 
Depending on the setting, characters could enrol in more than 

tion of pre-eminent importance. 
one cult, assuming the cults are not antipathetic, and that more than 

As a chald Anathaym, watched herf ather depart to attend the secretive rites 
a single cult is available to one of their culture, status and profession. 

and ceremonies of the god. Frustrated, she has been forbidden to accompany 

M ham until she receies her first shield, and proves her knowledge of the arts 
yyssTtiiCcAaLl ORrDdEeRrSs of war on the sands outside the city walls. She longs to serve Myceras as a 
Mystical cults seek mystical harmony based on self-discipline, loyal warrior: 

meditation and deep contemplation. They orientate their teachings Kara, her sister; on the other hand, was chosen to_follow a different path. 
on philosophical concepts instead of supernatural beings, although Called by the god personally to serve as one of the priesthood, she has been 
they often revere the original source of their learning, be that a god tnvested as an initiale to act as the conduitfor Myceras® maraculous powers. 
or deified mortal. Thus a mystical cult can be as much of a religion The Scarlet Spears are an elite brotherhood of proven warriors serving 
as a theistic cult, albeit the focus being on self-enlightenment or tran- the Queen and “Temple directly. Meeros’s Champion is always drawn_from 
scendence, rather than direct veneration of any particular entity. the Scarlet Spears, and to wear their blood-red cloak is to atiract the highest 

respect and honour: 

SoORrCcEeRrYy ORrDdEeRrSs Anathaym, naturally, wants, more than anything, to join the Scarlet Spears 

Sorcery cults actively seek to understand, manipulate and con- as her father once did. She will need to prove herself in battle, and succeed 

trol the nature of the universe through research and study. Akin to in some great deed in service to the cily if she is to have any hope of joining 

mystical cults, the order might associate itself with a deity, demon 
or founder but the personage is not the primary focus of the cult, 

on. These organisations are known as ‘Brotherhoods’ (and, equally, 
at least not for the purposes of pursuing magical knowledge. Some- 

‘Sisterhoods’). 
what more esoteric than other types of cult, sorcery orders are gen- 

Examples of brotherhoods can range from the clandestine sup- 
erally modest organisations except in cultures which embrace sor- 

port and mutual protection of an organised thieves’ guild to the 
cery in every aspect of life. 

militaristic camaraderie of an elite unit of soldiers. Entry to these 
brotherhoods often requires some test of worthiness, and demon- 

SrpiiritT CUuLlTtSs stration of suitable prowess within the field that the group specialises 
Spirit cults venerate spirits and natural forces, such as ancestors, in. Despite being less metaphysically orientated, many brotherhoods 

nature spirits and elementals. Such spiritualistic worship can take still engage in ritual and follow strict rules of conduct, always alert 
many forms from simple shamanism to exotic types of totemic wor- to those members who’d transgress the rules set up to ensure mutual 
ship. In many ways spirit cults can be thought of as forerunners support, or the respect of the local community. 
of pantheism, but with spirits instead of gods. Spirit traditions can 
focus on an entire family of similar or related spirit types, or on a & Brotherhoods de-emphasise faith and religion. They may fig- 

powerful patron spirit which provides lesser spirits to its people. ure in the Brotherhood’s beliefs but other, more pragmatic 
values are central. 

T & Brotherhoods do not offer formalised access to magic. Indi- 
HheeIisTt CUuLlTtSs vidual members who are skilled magicians may teach magic 
Theist cults are those which worship a specific god or gods. The 

to other members, but this is very much an ad hoc affair. 
number of cults and scope of each depends on the theist culture. 

& Brotherhoods are very often vocationally orientated with the 
Some societies venerate only a single god (monotheism) whilst others 

aim of supporting members of similar careers, protecting 
venerate a group of deities known as a pantheon (pantheism). Indi- 

professional interests, and governing prices for services. 
vidual gods might be worshipped across many different societies but 

& Brotherhoods tend to be less constrained in their ways. Mem- 
in different ways. The same Hunter God might be worshipped by 

bers are not required to attend festivals or rituals for example, 
barbarian, civilised and nomadic cultures whereas the Trade God- and most members go about their daily lives calling on the 
dess is worshipped only by the civilised communities. Cult structures 

brotherhood when needed — but duties, save for the direct 
can therefore become quite sophisticated and even complex. officers of the Brotherhood — are far less formal than in cults. 

& Brotherhoods can generally be joined at any time. Member- 
ship is based upon competence or dedication towards an ideal 

BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs — not a rite of passage. 
& Brotherhoods are separate from communities and cultures. 

Despite the importance of cults to MYTHRAS they will not fit 
Although they operate within them, they transcend commu- 

all campaign settings. And even when they do, not all characters 
nity boundaries in ways cults cannot. 

want to become cultists. Yet history is scattered with examples of 
associations and societies, some secret, some not so secret, that fulfil Just as cults can have different magical or religious foci, brother- 
a similar role to cults but offer a different emphasis whilst giving hoods may also come in a variety of organisational structures with 
access to very similar resources — primarily support, training, and so very different purposes. 

193



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

COoMmPpAaNnIiEeSs WHhy JoOIinN? 
Companies are groups of people who band together to pursue a 

Most people are members of a cult or brotherhood, often join- 
particular purpose. By implication companies tend to be small, close 

ing several during their life. The choice of which ones a character 
knit associations which travel about, or perhaps gather together on a 

should join is dependent upon several things: race, culture and pro- 
seasonal basis. Examples are exclusive clubs of gentlemen explorers, 

fession. Unless the campaign world is a melting pot of different spe- 
wandering bands of entertainers, specialist mercenary units or even 

cies rubbing shoulders with one another, humans, for example, will 
merchant venturers. 

tend to join those Cults and Brotherhoods formed by other humans. 
Likewise inhabitants of a particular culture will normally only join 

COoLlLlEeGgEeSs organisations supported by that culture; and similarly with those 

Colleges are associations formed by those bound by academic who practice specific careers. 

achievement, or by seeking particular avenues of knowledge. Due to The natural choice will be a cult or brotherhood that is related 
their dependence on records, whether memorised, inscribed or writ- to the biggest part of his upbringing, but it need not be the lim- 
ten, more formal colleges are often bound to a particular location ited to that. Adventurers are rarely sedentary, and they gain greater 
where the brethren can congregate. Colleges can take the form of exposure to different cultures and viewpoints than most who never 
monastic scholars serving a great library, travelling bards gathering leave their home communities. The choice of cult, whether done at 

and passing on news, a secret order of seekers after a lost artefact, character creation or later, through play, raises a few questions that 

and so on. it is worth taking the time to consider: 

& How will your character be viewed by your community and 
GAaNnGgSs peers? Joining an antagonistic or enemy organisation could 

Gangs are localised organisations of small scale, led by the most have profound repercussions for personal safety. 
dominant member and usually self-serving. Most are formed to alle- & What Cults and Brotherhoods do your fellow characters 
viate boredom, garner a little money or as a means of protection belong to? Again, striking a pose that is at odds with those 
against rival gang persecution. This is not always the case, however. you adventure with could introduce difficulties and tensions 
Some gangs form for the purpose of instilling order in societies that might otherwise be avoided. 
which lack formal law enforcement, or to ensure respect is paid to & What is your character’s goal regarding membership? What 
local people, businesses or even gods. Examples often take the form sort of relationship and personal power is being sought? 
of street gangs of adolescent youths, self-elected neighbourhood All Cults and Brotherhoods offer power of some kind, but 
watches, bands of criminal cutthroats or even informal unions of there is always a personal cost attached to it: a commitment. 
labourers. Committing to a particular path that one might later come 

to regret or become disillusioned with could again make life 

GuuIiLlDdSs very difficult. 

Guilds are bodies who regulate the teaching and practice of a & How far do you intend your character to progress within the 

particular profession. Fundamentally economic in nature, guilds organisation? Many characters remain as lay members or 

often establish a stranglehold over all those who would carry on that novices, but higher standing brings greater power and pres- 

craft or trade — taking a tithe of each member’s earnings in return tige — always at some cost. To embrace the benefits of higher 

for protection, market stability, and a formalised recognition of the rank, what are you prepared to sacrifice? 

quality of their products. Guilds often have great reach, spreading Choosing a cult should not be a knee-jerk choice or one that is 
across entire nations rather than being limited to a single urban set- seen to offer rapid power with no commitment in the short term. 
tlement. As such they can have very diverse objectives depending on A character ought not to join a war cult simply because he is good 
the craft, for instance a Sea Traders’ Guild may have an outpost in with a weapon and likes killing: he should join it if his father was a 
every civilised city with a port, whilst a thieves’ guild may be limited great warrior, because he wishes to follow a martial profession, and 
to operating in a particular ward of a single town. because he wants to ensure that the enemies of his community are 

defeated. 

REeGgIimMEeNnTtSs Players should look carefully at the cult and brotherhoods as they 

Regiments are military bodies who form an identity based on relate to their character’s culture, community;, background and per- 

their prowess, style of fighting, arms and equipment, or even their sonal desires. Make the choice based on certain informed decisions. 

duty. Their primary purpose is mutual support, ensuring that indi- Cuults and Brotherhoods, once joined, are more than simply a mag- 

vidual members work together as a team, and providing camarade- ical or religious club; they are faiths, and faiths are often vengeful if 

rie when not on campaign. Regiments are often passionate about their principles are ignored or betrayed. 

their ¢lan or reputation. They can be anything from elite royal body- The Games Master is also the ultimate arbiter when it comes 

guards to mercenary legions feared for their brutality. to cult and brotherhood choices. He may, quite reasonably, restrict 
membership only to those who appear both suitable and sincere. If 
so, then the character must either accept the restrictions or simply 
choose not to initiate into a cult or brotherhood until later, when 
more options, determined through actual play, are open to him. 

194



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

MEeMmBEbeRrSsHhIiPp 
Characters can join Cults and Brotherhoods in one of two ways: 
1. Aspartof character creation. 
2. During game-play, as they learn more about their game 

world, and the organisations working within it. 

Membership is not mandatory — but characters who join a 
group are likely to have access to certain benefits and resources that 
non-members will either be denied or find difficult to obtain. Some 
thought should also be given to the roles these faiths and fraternities 
play in most societies: 

& Individuals usually inherit their parents’ and community’s 
beliefs, and are exposed to these attitudes and rituals day-in, 
day-out throughout their childhood and adolescence. Initiat- 
ing into a family or community cult is a natural progression, 
and even desired by many young people. 

& Individuals likewise inherit the same profession as their 
parents, usually working as children to help their father or 
mother perform their tasks. Thus parents often expect their 
offspring to follow them into the same career, and thereby 
brotherhood. 

& Cults are very often the basis for community. Not joining or 
initiating results in social stigma, or even exile or ostracism. 
Social pressure may be too difficult for some individuals to 
avoid. Brotherhoods may similarly have a major influence at 
the family level, perhaps forming a stranglehold on a particu- 
lar craft or employment, and forbidding non-members from 
performing that type of work. 

As MYTHRAS by default creates characters who are either just 
entering adulthood or who are young adults, cult membership may part of the rite of passage from youth to adult, which has created 
therefore be a highly desirable, or an unavoidable, part of character a relationship with the organisation. They follow its principles and 
creation. general beliefs, but gain no special advantages beyond the support it 

provides its members. 

MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp aASs PAaRrTt oOFf Characters who start off as professional magicians of a cult are 
permitted to begin one rank higher, being assumed to have success- 

CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr CRrEeAaTtIioOnN fully undergone the Initiation Ceremony or ritual associated with 

During the Careers and Development stages of character cre- the cult. Following the initiation ritual the character undergoes a 

ation (see chapter 2) players may opt to initiate into a cult or brother- period of training where he studies with the cult’s teachers and 

hood. Joining at the character creation stage offers certain benefits: elders so that he becomes an active and productive member of the 
cult. This training is considered part of the overall character cre- 

& Membership provides immediate context for the character, ation process. At the end of it the character emerges with the magic 
helping define and identify who he is, what he believes, and skills associated with the cult’s nature. 
where he belongs in the world. 

& Having several characters be members of the same or simi- 
lar organisations, even if they are from different backgrounds MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp dDUuRrIinNgG tThHEe GAaMmEe 
and professions, provides a ready-made reason for them to Many characters will join a cult or brotherhood during the 

be associating and working together at the start of the game. course of play. They may come across a cult that matches their ide- 
als at that time or find a calling that requires a particular religious 

Joining a cult or brotherhood during character creation requires or behavioural approach that only a particular kind of organisation 
no rolls for entry. It is assumed that the initiation forms a natural can serve. 
part of the character’s progression from childhood to adulthood. Joining a cult or brotherhood during play requires a number of 

MyTHRAS divides membership into several levels that reflect things: 
dedication or devotion to the organisation. The levels are explained 
in more detail later in this chapter, but any character who joins a 1. A demonstration that one is worthy of joining the group. 
cult or brotherhood during character creation is considered a Com- 2. Impressing the organisation’s leaders to gain membership. 
mon Member with the actual title being based on its nature. The 3. A donation of some kind. 
character has undergone some form of formal initiation, usually as 

195



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

DEeMmOoNnSTstRrAaTtIioONnSs oOFf WOoRrTtHhINinEeSsSs Masters should not necessarily feel restricted by this distribution. If, 

Such things will vary, but usually the character will need to show in your campaign, the barbarian culture has a mystical tradition, 

that he embodies the same ideals, has similar religious or philosoph- then allow that type of cult. 

ical beliefs, and understands what the organisation is striving to do. 
BAaRrBbAaRrIiaAnN 

A character may have performed a service for the prospective organ- 
Spirit Cult, Theist Cult. 

isation, or simply acted as a common member for a time (usually a 
year, but sometimes less), thereby impressing the local leadership. Ciiviluisedp 
The cult or brotherhood may require a service to be performed 

Mystical Order, Sorcery Order, Theist Cult. 
— such as a quest or task that confirms the candidate’s suitability. 
Certain background checks may be performed, and a character’s NooMmAaDdIiCc 
reputation assessed. Spirit Cult, Theist Cult. 
A character might be asked to renounce a particular mode of 

behaviour, previous belief or way of life. For example someone who PrrRiImMIitTiIvVeE 
has spent his career as a mercenary and now wants to join a healing Spirit Cult. 

cult might be required to foreswear his violent past. Sometimes the 
choices can be tough, but worthwhile. 

This demonstration of worthiness must be quantifiable within 
the game. That is to say, the character must have done, or will do PRrOoGgRrEeSsSsIioOnN 
something, during play, to aptly demonstrate his worthiness. It is Once a character has joined a cult or brotherhood they often seek 

usually not enough to have a player say that something has or will be to rise in the organisation’s ranks, in the pursuit of greater respect, 

done: one must show, not tell. reputation or responsibility or simply out of a thirst for knowledge 
and power. Progression is sometimes limited by the nature of the 

ImMPpRrEeSsSsiInNgG TthHEe EXxAaMmIiNnEeRrSs organisation; cults might only grant access to the higher ranks to 
Demonstrations of worthiness must be substantiated. Characters those who are professional magicians. Others might slow advance- 

need to convince the cult or brotherhood’s leaders of their suitabil- ment according to the skills of the character, his completion of a 
ity. Assuming worthiness has been demonstrated, impressing the suitably heroic task or even block promotion until a space in the 
examiners can be abstracted with a roll against a suitable skill. For ranks opens up. 
instance, entry into a criminal street gang may require a demon- Such considerations are, as always, dependent on the campaign 
stration of a skill like Stealth, Sleight or Streetwise. If the roll is setting, and how quickly the Games Master wishes to allow char- 
successful then the examiners have been sufficiently impressed to acters to advance. The following guidelines are simply suggestions 
extend membership. Characters can augment their required roll in from which a Games Master can develop his own novel cult or 
the following ways: brotherhood structures. For instance the skill requirements of rank 

can be adjusted to ease progression. 
& Use of an appropriate Passion. 

It should always be remembered that just because a character 
& Use of an appropriate Communication skill such as Influ- 

might meet the mechanistic requirements of a particular rank that 
ence, Deceit or Oratory. 

doesn’t automatically grant them the right to achieve it. Promotion 
& Membership of an allied cult or brotherhood. 

within a cult or brotherhood is a very major reward, and should be 
& A suitably impressive donation. 

something strived for by roleplaying. In fact it is encouraged that 

Impressing the examiners leads to the character becoming a cach advancement is somehow played out as a separate adventure 

Common Member of the new cult, irrespective of his station in or test to grant further depth to the organisation. 

society or rank in another organisation. From there he can rise in 
the new group as any other member. 

DooOnNAaTtIioOnNSs RAaNnKkSs 
Usually monetary, but sometimes the presentation of services, Most Cults and Brotherhoods are arranged in a pyramidal hier- 

goods or property seals the bargain. It shows final commitment to archy. Common members form the base of the pyramid, and are the 

the cult or brotherhood’s community, just as the previous demon- most numerous members of the organisation. These are regarded 

strations have proved suitability. It is difficult to quantify how high as part time supporters, affiliate members or retired comrades who 

or substantial a donation should be, and Games Masters will need may associate in any number of cults or brotherhoods, provided it is 

to weigh up the offering based on other factors. However if the done as part of their spare time. 

donation is substantial in nature, no matter what form it takes, then Higher ranks represent professional members of the organisa- 

Games Masters should make the demonstration of worthiness skill a tion, working or being educated full time under its edicts. Numbers 

step easier for the character. diminish as one advances up through the ranks until a handful of 
individuals, or even only one, occupy the upper echelons. Promotion 
brings greater privilege, prestige, learning, and sometimes magic or 

AVvAaIiLlAaBbIiLlIitTyY bByY CUuLlTtuURrEe
other benefits. The heroes, movers and shakers generally fill the 

 highest ranks with the devoted, yet relatively inactive, faithful form- 

The general availability of these cults is suggested in the list ing the lower tiers. 

of Cultural Background and Cult Types below. However Games 

196



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

COoMmPpAaRrAaTtIiVvEe RAaNnKk TIitTLlEeSs 

Theist Cult Animist Cult Sorcery Order Mpystical Order Brotherhood 

Common Lay Member Tollower Novice Aspirant Associate 

Dedicated Initiate Spirit Worshipper Apprentice Student Apprentice 

Proven Acolyte Shaman Adept Disciple Journeyman 

Overseer Priest High Shaman Mage Master Master 

Leader High Priest Spirit Lord Arch Mage Sage Grand Master 

Different Cults and Brotherhoods have different names for their donation. Most cults will be reticent to perform such magics for 
ranks. The table below shows the default rank names arranged by non-members, as the cult’s resources will often be stretched just to 
cach organisation’s type and the membership level. Rank names can satisty their own brethren, although the purpose or the cult may 
vary according to setting, but the following are included for ease of influence this. 
reference to the magic chapters. 
A description of each rank follows, outlining their place in the DEeDdIiCcAaTtEedD 

hierarchy, requirements, duties, benefits and magic. 
This is the start of the inner membership of the cult or brother- 

hood, requiring the member to commit themselves fully to serve the 
ComMMmOoNn organisation. Much of this time is spent performing the drudge work 

The first step in joining a cult or brotherhood is to become a required to keep the organisation running, or at least that which can- 
common member. A character can belong to several organisations not be given over to common members. In addition the dedicated 
as a common member, provided they do not have conflicting pur- member is expected to learn and practice those skills which the cult 
poses or are diametrically opposed. The vast majority of members or brotherhood deems important. 
of any organisation are common members; casual practitioners or Since this rank represents the lowest level of professional com- 
worshippers who follow doctrine, and attend regular meetings and mitment to a cult or brotherhood, it is difficult for a character to 
ceremonies, depending on its nature. be a dedicated member of more than one organisation at a time, 

Common rank reflects the type of folks who are faithful worship- except for closely related or mutually supporting organisations. It 
pers of a religion, rarely called up levies of a city guard, subscribing should denote those studying for proficiency in a career, such as a 
members of the beggars’ guild, and so on. In effect they are those neophyte sorcerer enrolled at a university, a low ranking legionary 
who have a level of part time commitment to a cult or brotherhood training his martial skills or a young cutpurse learning the arts of 
whilst engaged in a different career. thievery at his guild. 

REeQqUuIiRrEemMEeNnTtSs REeQqUuIiRrEemMEeNnTtSs 
Common members must have at least a basic understanding of Dedicated members will have their knowledge and abilities 

the beliefs of the organisation, and make a small donation (of time tested to determine their sincerity and eligibility. To be adopted by 
or money) each time they visit the cult’s shrine or temple or to pay the cult or brotherhood the character must know at least five of the 
brotherhood dues. cult’s skills at 50% or more. 

DuuTtiies 
Common members have few duties. They are expected to attend 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
important celebrations, festivals or meetings specific to the organi- 

The preeminentf aith in Meeros, those belonging to the Cult of Myceras 
sation, but need not attend every one provided they maintain some 

are granted rights of full citizenship in exchange for being called upon to_fill 
minimal commitment. For example Lay Members of a theistic cult 

the armoured files of the army in times of war. Since such rights are not 
would partake in special high Holy Day celebrations, but unless they 

heredutary, membershup in s excluswe ranks s the most sort afler in the city. 
are aiming to rise in the ranks of the cult, they will not be expected 

Desprte this, and other significant benefits, the inability for warriors to 
to attend regular ceremonies. 

progress beyond lay membership rankles with Anathaym as she wanis to serve 

PRrIiVvIilLeEgGEeSs Myceras as_fully as she can, and learn the cult’s secrets. Kara, who under- 

Common members will be able to find tutors for any skills the stands these things better than her sister; explains that the priesthood is a 

cult teaches. However they must still pay the normal training or Calling. Those who want to progress fully within the cult must give-up their 

tuition rates for a tutor’s services. They may seek the aid of the previous lives and careers, dedicating themselves wholly to Myceras. 

organisation for protection, support, sanctuary, and consultation for You would beforbidden from lifting a spear; drawing a sword or holding 

personal problems. a shield,” Kara says, patiently. ‘Myceras has chosen you to be one of his 
warriors; he gave you those talents. Be content with them, andyou will find 

MAaGgIiCc other ways to prosper.’ 

Common members of cults are rarely taught magic, although Reluctantly Anathaym accepts that she would rather be a warrwor than 
much depends on the setting. Instead common members have the a priest, and so sels her sights firmly on_joining the Scarlet Spears as soon as 

right to request magic be performed on their behalf, for a suitable she can. 

197



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

Duuttiies DuuTtiies 
Characters are expected to work or study full time unless specif- Proven members are expected to take charge of the management 

ically sent off to perform tasks or adventures. If possible they must and education of lower ranking members. They must also attend 
also attend all ceremonies, festivals or meetings. all ceremonies, services, and meetings essential to the organisation; 

and to be active in expanding the cult’s membership and influence. 
PRrIiVvIilLeEgGEeSs 

Dedicated members receive communal bed and board at tem- PRrIiVvIilLeEgGEeSs 
ples, guild halls, garrisons or wherever their organisation is located. Proven members may requisition equipment and materials nec- 
Some also offer a small income depending on whether they provide essary for cult or brotherhood business. They can also commandeer 
goods or services as part of their membership. In addition they are lower ranks to provide any necessary support. In addition they are 
provided access to trainers, but do not have to pay full rates for such paid a stipend suitable to their status, and provided with their own 
tuition. personal chambers in whatever settlement or building they are 

stationed. 
MAaGgIiCc 

Dedicated members are eligible to learn the magic taught by that MAaGgIiCc 
cult. As for dedicated members, but with access to certain rank 

restricted abilities. 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
As a Lay Member of the cult, Anathaym is expected to attend a few key OVvEeRrSsEeEerR 

religious celebrations each year. The praising of Myceras defeating Yethis the The most senior members of each cult congregation or broth- 
demon-snake, which coincides with the founding of the city; and the annual erhood order, overseers are those schooled in its deepest secrets 
purtfication of weapons at the beginning and end of the campaign season. and procedures. Their primary responsibilities are to arrange the 
Additionally she us required to answer any summons to muster the army bureaucratic or metaphysical running of the local organisation, giv- 
whether to attack an enemy or defend the city. ing orders to lower ranking members. Whilst most of their time is 

In exchange _for her oaths, Anathaym is granted access to tuition in any taken up with these duties, overseers are provided with a greater 
of the city’s civic combat styles, free repair of her arms and armour tf broken degree of autonomy, and may formulate their own plans, provid- 
wn the service of Myceras, and the right to sleep on thefloor of any shrine or ing they do not contradict the requirements or objectives of the 
temple of the god. organisation. 

Last, but by no means least, lay members are permitted to request cult Overseers are often the superiors of their assigned branch 
maracles to be cast on thetr behalf — for as many silvers asfoes they cut down or temple, subdividing responsibilities between themselves if the 
under its blessing. A few folk maguc spells are also available to any warrior organisation is particularly large. Members of this rank are akin to 
who wishes to learn the skill, but the costs and efforts are significant enough military captains, guild masters or the head shaman of a tribe. A 
thatfew partake in the opportunity provided by the preesthood. temple priest for example, would look after an entire congregation 

and place of worship. 

REeQqUuIiRrEemMEeNnTtSs 
Overseers must have been proven members of the cult or broth- 

PRroOVvEenN erhood for a minimum of five years, and must know at least three 

Few members of a cult or brotherhood will rise to the position cult skills at 90% or better. 

of Proven, a rank that requires dedication and service but where the 
Duurmtiies 

inner secrets of the organisation begin to be revealed. With the rank 
Overseers are expected to lead all of the important ceremonies, 

comes a degree of independence and responsibility; proven mem- 
services and meetings of the organisation. They act as administrators, 

bers are given some authority over lower ranks, be that organising 
being responsible for both finances and any political manoeuvrings 

the daily duties, command of troops or the education of novices. 
required to maintain the status (and authority) of the organisation. 

On the other hand a proven member regains a degree of liberty and 
can utilise whatever free time they have to engage their own pursuits. PRrIiVvIilLeEgGEeSs 

Proven members are often sent off to new locales or encouraged 
Overseers may demand any of the resources available to their 

to travel to finish off their schooling. Examples of characters of 
branch of the organisation. They can also commandeer any or all 

this rank would be journeyman craftsmen, mercenary sergeants or 
of the lower ranked members or congregation to provide support for 

shrine attendants. 
their plans. However unless these are used to further the organisa- 

REeQqUuIiRrEemMEeNnTtSs tion as a whole, abuse of this power can lead to an alienation from 
the brethren. If desired overseers can draw on the cult or brother- 

Proven members must have been a dedicated member of the cult 
hood’s funds to pay themselves a high wage, and are provided with 

or brotherhood for a minimum of three years, and must know at 
the best living quarters available. 

least four cult skills at 70% or better. A valuable gift or service must 
be rendered to the cult, to demonstrate devotion and loyalty. MAaGgIiCc 

Overseers gain full access to all magic available to that 
organisation. 

198



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

KRrAaTtOoSs'’ SaAgGaA Most attempt to advance the standing, reach and power of the 

Kratos has reached the pinnacle of his powen, quite literally the right hand organisation, but others become drawn to seeking out further magi- 

claw of Yetfus the demon lord. His efforts have recreated the Order of the cal secrets, deeper enlightenment or even transcendence to divinity. 

Stygian Path, a sorcerous cult which spreads the potent, yetf oul black magic 
PRrIiVvIilLeEgGEeSs 

taught by the diabolical serpent. Most of the cult members are hus centaurs, 
Leaders may utilise the entire resources and personnel of the cult 

augmented by numbers of ophidians, and even a gorgon. Few of them have 
or brotherhood in any way they desire. They may even attempt to 

mands capable of comprehending the aris of sorcery, so they remain common 
change the very precepts of the organisation, corrupting or evolving 

members who partake in the ritual sacrifices to the demon lord. 
its nature. 

A handful of the ophidians however take to the teachings of the Stygian 
Path, and these he mercilessly corrupts with the dark knowledge of their pro- MAaGgIiCc 
genator. After many years Kratos achieves the title and rank of Arch Mage by 

Cult leaders may try to master new powers or abilities of surpass- 
the grace of lus demonic mentor. As a reward the demon promases to teach the 

ing potency, beyond the nominal scope of the cult; at a significant 
arch mage a secret ritual which will invest the sorcerer with part of Yethus’s 

risk of bringing doom or disaster if their attempt fails. 
own power; making kim both Immortal and Invulnerable to weapons. 

To prepare lamself for the ritual of gifl giving, Kralos takes ever increas- 
ing amounts of mind expanding lotus dust lo create the necessary condut 
through which he must recewe the diabolical gifi. When the time comes, Kratos BEeNnEeFfIiTtSs 
gathers together the entire cult, and begins a three day ritual to open a portal The following section further emphasises the benefits of joining 
lo Yetfus in the underworld. The ceremony inwvolves much debauchery and a cult or brotherhood. These are only suggestions and guidelines 
sacrifwe, but at its climax something goes dreadfully wrong. which should be used to encourage imaginative design. 

As the wards imprisoning the demon lord sunder, Kratos belatedly realises 
he has been tricked, and is a mere tool which Yethis has used to gain lus own TRrAaIinNIinNgG 
freedom. The sorcerer screams as he ts possessed by the demon, his skin turning 

Common members of an organisation are offered training but 
scaly, and eyes to burning slits, whilst a thick tail slowly grows,from under his 

must pay for the pleasure. Although this may not sound like a bene- 
robes. All prostrate themselves before the demon lord, who bellows in triumph, 

fit, it may be the case that the cult or brotherhood are the only ones 
and slaps the ground with hus serpent tarl with the sound of a thunderclap. Far 

who offer tuition in that particular field, especially when it comes to 
away in Meeros the earth trembles... 

professional skills. 
Higher ranks are offered training as a matter of course, since it 

LeEaAdDEerR is partly their purpose to ensure their members are well skilled in 
the areas the cult or brotherhood holds dear. This training may or 

The autocrats, spiritual heads and heroes of cults or brother- 
may not be ‘free’ but is likely to have been paid for by the member’s 

hoods, leaders are masters of everything the cult stands for, and 
parents or guardian if enrolled as a youth, or maintenance costs 

guide its future. When trouble threatens the organisation, it is they 
covered by duties the member performs under the auspices of the 

who will fight for its survival and prosperity; not necessarily by arm- 
organisation. 

ing themselves with weapons, and calling upon the greatest magic, 
The level and competence of trainers and teachers depend 

but more often by Machiavellian manipulation — laying down long 
entirely on the size and presence of the organisation, but since train- 

term strategies and sending out prominent, or perhaps expendable, 
ing is one of the major advantages of being a cult or brotherhood 

members to enact their plans. 
member, Games Masters should not be too restrictive about provid- 

Reaching the lofty pinnacles of this rank places the entire cult 
ing access to such aid. 

or brotherhood into their hands to do with as they will. Leaders 
As a rule of thumb, use the following to determine training dis- 

are often charismatic commanders of legions, holy patriarchs of a 
counts based on rank: 

national religion or skulking arch sorcerers working to overthrow 
kingdoms from the shadows. Although the rank implies singular 
authority, many organisations may possess more than one who form 

Training Discount 
a council, such as a secret conclave of master thieves whom control 
a thieves’ guild from behind the scenes. Common 0% 

REeQqUuIiRrEemMEeNnTtSs Dedicated 25% 

Proven 50% 
Leaders must have been overseers for a minimum of least ten 

years, and must have at least two cult skills at 110% or better. They Overseer 75% 

must also have performed an invaluable service for the cult or broth- Leader 100% 

erhood, worthy of recognition as a future guide or custodian; or 
they must remove the previous leader by whatever means necessary PRrOoTtEeCcTtIioOnN 
to seize his power. Members of a cult or brotherhood can expect to be protected by 

that organisation, provided of course the character has not trans- 
Duuttiies 

gressed any rules of membership (see Taboos and Geasa below). 
Leaders are effectively free to pursue any course of action 

The type of protection offered depends entirely on what the charac- 
they desire, provided that the overseers beneath them are suitably 

ter is threatened with. 
schooled and able to function independently of direct management. 

199



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

and weapons, for example, or someone joining 
the carpenters guild as an apprentice be given 
woodworking tools. 

Some organisations endow their members 
with a small wage in addition to bed and board. 
Such stipends are usually modest at the lower 
ranks, but can provide a great deal of wealth 
at upper levels. Much depends on donations 
provided by common members, payments 
the organisation collects from undertaking 
commissions and any supplementary tithes it 
receives from land ownership or taxation pow- 
ers granted it. 

Material aid need not be limited to only 
full time members. A lay member of a theistic 
religion might request support from his cult in 
times of personal misfortune. Such assistance 
could take the shape of a simple charitable gift 
to help them over a brief period of financial 
difficulty, up to something as significant as call- 
ing his religious brethren together to rebuild 
the member’s home if it were destroyed in an 
carthquake. 

Other financial and materialistic benefits 
are limitless in scope. Trade deals, political 
support during elections, physical attendance 
during sickness, funeral services, and so on. In 
historical and fantasy settings where the con- 
cept of communal welfare is completely alien, 
Cuults and Brotherhoods are the only source of 
this vital support. 

SOoCcIiaALl STtaAtTuUSs 
A more abstract reward of membership is 

that of social status. Any benefit this provides 
is purely dependent on the standing or the 
cult or brotherhood in the local community. A 
member of a mercenary company, for exam- 

Physical protection or protection against arrest may be as simple 
ple, may gain little status, being regarded as barely more than scum 

as secking sanctuary at the nearest shrine or holy place, provided of 
by the inhabitants of a city, although he might still be treated with 

course that those pursuing him are forbidden to enter such sanctums. 
wary respect; whereas a member of the masons’ guild could expect 

On the other hand a member may request somebody be assigned 
deferential treatment, and invitations to exclusive society functions. 

to act as a personal guardian. For instance a retired member of a 
Much depends on how important the organisation is in that cul- 

Military Brotherhood whose standing may have lapsed to that of a 
ture. Wealth, religious standing, political influence, popular opinion 

common member, could reasonably request protection from his old 
and dangerousness all play an important role in its determination. 

regiment which — out of esprit de corps — assigns a couple of soldiers 
to go and deal with the problem. 

Shelter can also take the form of legal or political protection, the MAaGgIiCc 
organisation using its standing to discourage active persecution of Although specifically restricted to cults, the provision of magic is 
its members. already documented in the previous rank descriptions and examples 

given in each magical discipline chapter. Yet the fundamental con- 

MAaTtEeRrIiAaLl AIidD cept of magic availability should be considered further. 
By default MYTHRAS assumes that only those who progress above 

Members may also benefit from material aid provided by their 
the rank of Common Member are permitted access to the skills of 

cult or brotherhood. Food and lodging has previously been men- 
magic casting. This has been adopted to enable the creation of faiths 

tioned as a privilege, but this is not the only assistance which can 
which don’t automatically provide magical powers to all of their 

be given. An organisation may provide those who join them full 
brethren. Yet there is nothing to stop a Games Master from doing 

time with the tools of their trade, a newly admitted warrior into a 
exactly this, if he desires to create a particularly magical setting. 

mercenary company might be provided with a set of basic armour 

200



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

In such cases joining cults should be confined to particular pro- intervene, and intervention may only be staged if the god has some 
fessions, or that type of magic may lose its exclusivity. In those cases stake in the outcome. Neither can the form of intervention be dic- 
where a cult offers more than a single type of magic, Games Masters tated or controlled by the plaintiff: a god cannot be compelled to smite 
could grant training in the ‘lesser’ magic to common members whilst a priest’s foes with hails of fire or to pummel a coastal town with a 
reserving the ‘higher’ magics to those of more advanced rank. tidal wave. The god (and therefore the Games Master) always decides 

Conversely Games Masters may restrict access to magic to how it will intervene and to what extent. The intervention may be 
higher ranks, and indeed it is reccommended that more potent spells, obvious and crude, or inconspicuous and subtle. Much depends on 
miracles, spirits and talents be withheld to specific membership lev- the god, its nature, its motives, and what it is intervening for. 
els, so that a character must prove himself for years before gaining To invoke Divine Intervention involves the following: 
knowledge of those powerful abilities. 

& The plaintiff must be an active member of a theist cult and 
be of Priest or High Priest rank. 

GIiFfTtSs & The plaintiff must not have made a call for intervention 
Gifts are secret teachings provided to those who advance far within the last month. 

enough in a cult or brotherhood to be trusted with their knowledge. & The plaintiff must have an active Devotional Pool (i.e., there 
The nature of a gift can be either magical or mundane according must be Magic Points within it). 
to the wishes of the Games Master and the setting. They are often, &« The plaintift makes a Hard Devotion roll, if a High Priest, 
although not exclusively, restricted to those of highest rank. or a Formidable Devotion roll, if a priest. Success indicates 

These Gifts vary hugely from organisation to organisation. Some that the god has heard the plea, and will respond in a way 
offer them and some do not. Gifts can take the form of treasures, decided by the Games Master but in keeping with the god’s 
relics, unique spells, lost knowledge, and even special powers granted nature and power. 
by extra dimensional entities. Those blessed with their possession are & The help provided by the god results in the plaintiff’s Devo- 
expected to use these Gifts to further the cult or brotherhood’s aims: tion skill being reduced by 1d4+1%. 
abusing them can lead to their removal, and possibly other sanctions 
against the miscreant. The availability of Divine Intervention is dependent on the set- 

Whilst Gifts depend very much on the type of organisation, some ting. In traditional Swords and Sorcery stories the gods are distant, 

examples, with their game effects, are provided below. These are not often uncaring and unwilling to intervene on behalf of their suppli- 

exhaustive nor prescriptive: Games Masters may invent others to cants; in High Fantasy settings intervention may be more common. 

suit the nature of the campaign. 
A Gift is reward for loyalty, service and commitment: it is not 

a power gained simply for attaining a certain level. It is up to the REeSsTtRrIicCtTiIoOnNSs 
Games Master to decide whether a character has proven his worth 

Joining a cult or brotherhood is more than simply passing a test 
to the higher echelons — granting the Gift as an unforeseen reward 

and then carrying-on as before, reaping the rewards of membership. 
—or to provide the opportunity to gain such powers in game, depen- 

There are restrictions involved in maintaining the necessary faith, 
dent on the successful completion of a challenging quest or service. 

dedication or bonds of loyalty to the principles held by the cult or 
A selection of sample Gifts are given on page 202. 

brotherhood. Some organisations deliberately embrace these restric- 
Gifts can work in one of several ways: 

tions in order to make membership challenging or exclusive. 
The usual methods used to ensure that only the most dedicated 

1. The Gift works simply when called upon. 
and faithful join the ranks of an organisation are those of oaths, 

2. The Gift costs 1 Magic Point to invoke. It may cost more, 
superstitions, taboos and geasa. Games Masters are encouraged to 

depending on the nature of the Gift. 
use a variety of these, not only establishing each cult and brother- 

3. The Gift requires a successful roll to invoke. The roll used 
hood with its own unique feel, but also granting some interesting 

depends on the nature of the cult. For Theists the roll would 
aspects to roleplaying one of their membership. 

be against Devotion. For Sorcerers, against Shaping. For 
Some organisations may only have one or two restrictions to 

Animists, against Trance. For Mystics, against Meditation. 
become, and remain, a member. Others might possess more draco- 

4. The Gift requires a roll, and an expenditure of Magic Points. 
nian constraints, forcing new restrictions with each increase of rank. 

The method of managing Gifts depends very much on campaign In history there are examples of priests tied up with so many highly 
style. Heroic campaigns might have Gifts working simply when proscriptive edicts that they could barely leave their own homes or 
called to do so. More gritty, realistic play would call for either Magic temples for fear of transgressing some rule! 
Points or a roll. A low-magic campaign might require a roll, and 
Magic Point expenditure. Choose in advance how Gifts will be man- OAaTtHhSs 
aged to so that characters’ expectations when pursuing and receiv- 

Belonging to a cult or brotherhood requires loyalty. Failing in 
ing a Gift are also managed. 

that loyalty results in repercussions ranging from rebuke to death, 
depending on the nature of the group and the degree of infraction. 

D1iVvIinNEe InNtTeErRvVeEnNTtiIoOnN Loyalty is pledged in the form of an Oath. 
Theist cults may benefit from Divine Intervention — that is, the An oath is more than just a promise to abide by the organisation’s 

god intervening directly in mortal affairs, usually in response to rules. It is a pledge of allegiance and commitment on a par with 
a prayer from a beloved worshipper. No god is ever compelled to making a lifelong devotion to a god, which in some cases is exactly 

201



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

SaAmMPpLlEe GIiFfTtSs 
Gift Effect 

Abstinence Exist without one requirement for life, for example air, food, water, sleep. 

Alacrity The character rolls 1d6+6, rather than 1d10, for Initiative. 

Animal Fomiliar The recipient receives the companionship of a natural animal. The familiar obeys simple commands but will not go against its nature. The animal’s 

Average SIZ cannot exceed the character’s POW. 

Clhange Gender The character changes from male to female or vice-versa. All characteristics and skills remain the same but the voice and physical functions of the 

new sex are gained. 

Chaotic Blessing Roll once on the Chaos features table on pages 275 to 276. 

Cult Evolution The character can add a new spell, miracle, spirit or talent to the cult’s magical tradition. 

Elemental Gain an elemental helper which may be called once per adventure. 

LEternal Life The recipient will not die of natural causes during the lifetime of the gift, although they are still vulnerable to death through violence. 

Healthy The character’s Healing Rate is doubled. 

Insightful The character is immediately aware of the enemies of the cult and those who would directly harm him. 

Invulnerability Character is invulnerable to damage from one specified source: weapons, falling, poison, fire or something similar. 

Lucky When rolling for any skill test, the character can choose which way to read the d100 result. For example, a roll of 90 could be read as 09. Note: if 

double digits, such as 00, 11, 22, and so forth, are rolled, the result cannot be reinterpreted. 

Mghty The character’s Damage Modifier is recalculated, based on the sum of STR, SIZ and POW. 

Onacle The recipient is capable of appraising, with reasonable accuracy, the likely fate of someone he meets. He does not gain a detailed view of the future, 

but gains a general impression as to whether the individual will be prosperous, lead a full life, die peacefully, and so on. 

Pobyglot The character can understand any language spoken to him — but not read or write it. 

Perfection Raise a characteristic by 1d6 up to the species maximum. 

Resilience The character can endure any pain. He never needs to check Endurance to prevent unconsciousness when wounded, and is immune to torture. 

Resurrect Loved One Aloved one or favoured companion is brought back from death. This Gift can only be applied to each individual once. 

The character is gifted a special residence that is always safe from the cult’s enemies. This residence is usually no larger than a villa, and can take 

Sanctuary many forms (a tower, a small cave complex, and so on). Enemies of the cult — but not necessarily of the character — cannot pass the sanctuary’s 

threshold. 

Reincarnation If killed then the character’s soul is reborn in the body of a suitable creature 1d6 days after death. 

Resurrection If killed then the character rises from the dead 1d6 days after death, their body completely healed of any and all damage done to it. 

Robust The character’s Hit Points are recalculated, based on the sum of CON, SIZ and POW. 

Sagacity Raise one cult skill to 100%. 

Sense Parallels Aware of weaknesses in the fabric of reality. Can spot gates and portals to other planes of existence on a successful Perception roll. 

Some cults have a specific creature from the Creatures chapter that can be summoned, acting much like a familiar. This gift allows one creature of 

Summon the particular type mentioned to be summoned once per adventure. The creature performs one specific action, as directed by the character, and then 

departs. 

Swiftness The character gains one additional Combat Action. 

The character is gifted a weapon of the cult. The weapon is always of a special nature, be it magical (having enhanced damage, or enhancing a 

Weapon Combat Style), unbreakable, or having a particular effect against certain cult enemies. Games Masters will need to define the details. 

Wellspring Magic Points are regenerated at twice the usual rate. 

Youth Return to a young body, reversing all ageing effects. 

202



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

what is occurring. The oath itself does not accord any special pow- 
ers or provide access to magic. What it does is bind the swearer to OAaTtHhSs bBeEyYoOnNdD MEeMmBEbeRrSsHhIiPp 
the brethren, and is viewed as a deep and sacrosanct commitment. Oaths need not— and indeed should not — be confined to joining Cults 

Throughout history and across all types of societies, oaths are taken and Brotherhoods. Oaths can be sworn to lords, masters, and even other 

very seriously: breaking such an oath is an extremely serious matter. characters. The rules work in exactly the same way, and represent the 

New members swear their oath when joining the cult or brother- same thing. Remember though that Oaths are a very big, very serious 

hood. Details vary, but at the very least an oath encompasses: undertaking. Being Oath-Bound represents an obligation to the holder of 
the Oath. 1t comes with responsibilities and consequences. 1t binds fwo 

& Loyalty to the organisation people together. An Oath can over-ride casual responsibilities, friendships 
& Loyalty to its membership and relationships. A character may loathe her queen, for example: but she 
& A promise to abide by its rules 15 Oath-Bound to serve and protect her. 
& A promise to uphold it values A character can only be absolvedfrom an Oath if the Oath-Holder 
& A promise to protect its ideals decides to relieve the obligation. This is dependent on many circumstances 
& A promise to act in the group’s best interests — putting them but absolving an Oath tends to happen when: 

before personal ones 
& A promise to keep the cult or brotherhood’s secrets safe &K A particular obligation or debt has been fulfilled. 

& Circumstances are such that absolving the Oath is the best way 
Tailing in any one of these commitments results in a breaking of Jorward. 

the oath. Obviously some situations occur where there is no option &K The Oath-Holder’s trust in the Qath or the Oath-Bound has 
and, if the oath-breaker can prove to his peers that not breaking the dimanished to such a point that the Oath 15 now meaningless. 
oath would have resulted in much greater misfortune or detriment & The Oath-Holder dies (although remember that some Qaths are 
for the group, then his position may be viewed with leniency. sworn to a position rather than an individual: the hated queen’s 

Oaths are a type of Passion, and calculated as described on page passing does not absolve her servants’ oaths to the crown). 
22 of the Culture and Community chapter: 30% plus the character’s 
POW+INT. Generally the Oath-Bound cannotf orce the absolution of an Oath. They 

The oath is used in the following circumstances: might suggest it if the conditions are appropreate, but the accepted convention 
us that an Oath remains in force until its holder decides to absolve it. 

TouGgHh CHhOoIiCcEeSs - 4 
If a character is forced into a choice that would mean breaking 

his Oath, he must make two rolls: one for his Oath, and one for his with their Captain, can compare Oath values. The higher Oath 

Willpower. If his Oath roll wins the contest then the character abides value is more likely to gain favour or sway opinion than the lower. 

by his oath — taking whatever consequences come with it. If his Will- People who take their oaths seriously, and are committed to them 

power prevails then he has summoned the reserves necessary to have a natural way of reflecting their commitment through body 

break his Oath, and must similarly deal with whatever repercussions language, emotional signals, and so forth. 

that might have — if the organisation discovers the transgression. It is not necessary for a character to have an Oath score of a 

If Willpower beats Oath in this way, the value of the Oath is particular value to advance in rank. Oaths are held personally, and it 

reduced by 1d4+1%: if a character finds he can ignore his Oath is perfectly possible for someone with a shallow belief in their Oath 

once, ignoring it in the future is likely to become easier. to advance much further in the organisation than someone who is 
deeply committed. Indeed, those traitors and potential Oath-break- 

PRrOoVvIinNgG InNtTeEgGRrIitTyY ers driven by ambition might reasonably gain positions of high trust 

If a character finds himself in a situation where he needs to in their cult or brotherhood. 

prove his integrity, he can use his Oath in one of the following ways: 

& To augment his Influence (or skill appropriate to the circum- ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
stances) thereby gaining a bonus. The Cult of Myceras has several oaths, taboos and superstitions which 

& To use his Oath directly to prove his integrity beyond doubt: unite tts members. To join the cult Anathaym must swear an oath to protect 
As a sworn member of the Guild of Merchant Sailors, you the city of Meeros with her life, and never betray the temple, its priests or her 
have my word that we shall carry your cargo safely...’ brother worshippers. 

In additoon cult members are forbidden the _following: to leave the battle- 
The Oath can be opposed by Willpower, Insight or another, 

Jeeld with their backs to an enemy; to go to war or fight whilst rain fallsfrom 
appropriate skill depending on the circumstances. Much depends 

the sky; and to eat the flesh of a bull without casting its heart and loins on a 
of course on how that particular organisation is viewed by those the 

e in offering to the godf urst. 
character is interacting with. 

As a lay member she also learns of the superstitions which her brethren 

GRrOoUuPp StTaAnNDdIinNgG stridently believe in, these being: never pass a bull without praising the strength 
of Myceras, else suffer ill fortune; warriors should wear a helm crested with 

The value of the Oath is unconsciously reflected in a character’s 
bull tarl brastles, which grants the wearer tenacity; and, just as a bull urinates 

conduct and carriage when dealing with his peers. In this way the 
value of the Oath can be used comparatively to distinguish between before charging, a warrior should do the same before baitle. 

members of the same cult or brotherhood. Two mercenaries, for 
example, equally skilled and loyal but vying for a position of trust 

203



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

SUuPpEeRrSsTtIitTiIoOnNSs TaAbBoOOoSs 
Just about every culture is superstitious, but religions and profes- Taboos are things that are not done, both as a matter of cult tradi- 

sions usually have their own peculiar beliefs. Superstitions take many tion and as a way of avoiding bad fortune. Usually breaking a taboo 
forms, and are usually associated with avoiding bad luck (rather than is considered as bringing bad fortune on the whole cult or commu- 
encouraging good luck). These simple acts prevent one from becom- nity, and not just oneself. Some typical taboos are: 
ing prematurely noticed by fate, or the supernatural being which 

& Arson 
overlooks or haunts that particular organisation. A few examples of 

& Cowardice 
typical cult superstitions are as follows: 

& Defiling an artefact of the cult 
&K Never bidf arewell on a bridge (if you want to see the other person alive & Fating human flesh 

again). & Heterosexuality 
& Seeing a single crow is very unlucky; seeing a single hooded crow signals & Homosexuality 

war 1s close by. & Killing animals sacred to the cult 
& Placing on a corselet before ailaching your greaves will bring death very « Killing innocents 

close. « Looting 
X Burning beef bones when making broth brings a bad harvest and poor & Lying 

hunting & Making independent peace with a blood feud enemy 
& Malice and envy are o be feared when sparks jump out of thef ire. & Marrying 
K If thirteen people sit down to dine, the last to rise will meet with ill & Murdering outside of a blood feud 

Jortune. & Necrophilia 
&K If a bad omen is observed, spit to avoid bad luck, and touch a piece of & Pacdophilia 

iron. & Rape 
& Speaking to a member of a different species or opposite sex 

In developing a cult or brotherhood, consider what superstitions « Theft within the cult 
will be associated with it. Some might be hidden wisdom whilst 

& Torture 
others can be odd quirks. Bear in mind the nature of the cult, and 

& Treachery to the cult 
the nature of the society or culture of its members. Primitive cults 

& Worshipping false/foreign gods (indeed, worshipping any 
are likely to be more superstitious than civilised ones, but that is by 

gods) 
no means a hard and fast rule. All cults maintain distinct peculiar- 
ities that most, if not all, members will Breaking a taboo usually involves a punishment — a trial or quest, 
observe. for instance but also by the accepting of a Geas (see below). Punish- 

It is up to the Games Master to ments can run the full gamut: ostracism to torture to execution. The 
decide whether bad luck will actu- severity of the punishment reflects the depth of the taboo, and how 
ally occur if the character ignores it reflects on the cult, the society and its members. 
a superstition. This can take effect 
by the application of unexplained GEeAaSsaA 
skill penalties at odd moments, 

A geas is an obligation which is often used as a curse or a method 
or strange twists of 

of imparting heroic power. If a cult or brotherhood member under 
fate causing events to 

a geas violates their taboo, the infractor will suffer dishonour or even 
backfire against the 

death. On the other hand, observing of one’s geas is believed to 
blasé character. 

bring power and good luck. In traditional mythology, a hero’s doom 
comes about due to violation of the geas, either by accident, or by 
having multiple geasa, and then being placed in a position where 
they have no option but to violate one in order to maintain another. 

Generally a cult or brotherhood only possesses geasa which 
reflect the nature and purpose of the organisation. These are an 
inherent part of the group’s myth and history, explaining its reason 
for being. A character who breaks his geas, whether consciously or 
unwittingly, is deprived of all Luck Points from that moment on. 
Some Games Masters may wish to allow each geas to provide a 
counterbalancing power (see Gifts page 201). This too is lost if the 
geas 1s ever broken. 
A geas can be used to reinforce a social condition, such as a vow 

of chastity or being forbidden to eat meat on festival days. It may 
also be more perilous, compelling the cultist to act in a way con- 
trary to clan or individual norms in order to atone for some previous 

204



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

crime. It is up to the Games Master to decide how geasa are used in ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
his setting, if at all. Sample geasa include: In a rash moment of anger Anathaym strikes her rival, Xenos, when he 

makes an inappropriate remark about her sister. She breaks Xenos® nose, but 
& Never use a sword in battle 

unfortunately does so in view of several cult Elders. As Xenos is also a lay 
& Take a vow of permanent silence 

member of Myceras the Elders deem Anathaym’s infraction serious enough 
& Accept no healing from wounds inflicted in battle lo earn her a geas (Xenos, of course, has embellished his side of the story 
& Wear no armour shamelessly, casting lamself as the victim of an unprovoked assault). She is 
& Drink no alcohol ordered to venture into the baleful Forests of Sykes, in search of the lost Crown 

& Take a permanent vow of chastity of Meera, the first Queen of Meeros. The crown 15 said to be magical, and 

& Become a direct slave of the chief or an elder @5 one of the Lost Treasures of Meeros. If she survwes the task and succeeds 
then her geas will be lifled, and she may even befeted by her cult. If shef ails, 

& Accept exile from the clan, and make no attempt to join 
she s unlikely to survive. As she leaves the Temple of Myceras she sees the 

another 
smarking Xenos, and decides that she will succeed in her geas at any cost, and 

& Quest into enemy lands and kill X enemies extract a_far more subtle revenge on the arrogant nobleman. 
& Live outdoors permanently, never accepting shelter 

& Fat no meat — offer all meat given to the ancestors or clan 
you wish, but assemble some notes on what ceremonies usu- 

chief 
ally require, using myths, history, and other elements to deter- 

& Fat no vegetables - offer all vegetables given to the ancestors 
mine what they consist of. 

or clan chief & Where is the organisation’s home? This might be obvious, if 
& Never utter a single lie the group is local to a small community, but large organisa- 
& Seek-out and start a blood feud tions generally have a base of focus, where the major temple, 

& Journey to holy place, and remain there in the god’s sight for guild house or secretive retreat is located. 

nine days and nights & What happens to those who stray from the cult or brother- 
hood’s path, betray its ideals or attempt to leave? Are magical 
or secular punishments enforced? What is the greatest conse- 
quence which can occur — exile, death or killing of the trans- 

OTtHhEeRr ASsPpEeCcTtSs gressor’s entire family? Is there no sanction at all? Consider 
the organisation’s nature, and outline the punishments, if any, 

The Cults and Brotherhoods described in this chapter are very 
for going against its ideals. 

rudimentary. Games Masters will need to develop their own details 
& What gifts, if any, are offered to the highest members of the 

depending on their MYTHRAS campaign setting. MYTHRAS supple- 
organisation? Look at the nature and role of the organisation, 

ments will no doubt offer fully detailed cults for use in games. Often 
and select gifts accordingly. Will members of brotherhoods 

the fine detail of a cult is not necessary — to begin with characters 
gain supernatural gifts in the form of items? Will the organi- 

simply need to know the bare bones, so below are some general tips 
sation have access to more than one type of gift? Look at the 

on providing a little more cult development. 
list on page 202 to help you decide what should be specific to 

& Organisations usually reflect a real-world need: a profession, the group you’re developing, 

a way of life, a philosophy. Look to fill these gaps. 
& Not all organisations are large. Many are local cults or broth- 

For further guidance on rounding out organisations, see Cults 
erhoods revering a local nature spirit, a small, forgotten god 

and Brotherhoods in the Campaign on page 290. 
or a hero known in a particular region. 

& Organisations provide meaning. Meaning is usually con- 
veyed through myths, codes, rituals and taboos. Spend some 
time thinking about these facets as part of developing a cult. CuulLltT aAnNDd 
Remember that each one explains things in its own ways. 
There is no single truth. BRroOTthHeErRhHoOoOdD CEeNnTtRrEeSs 

& Organisations celebrate ceremonial and holy days. At least Most organisations have a base of some form. This might be 
one day will mark the founding of the cult or brotherhood, as simple as a sacred clearing in an ancient forest where the spir- 
and one will mark another major point of importance, its are most accessible, a remote mountain fortress where a military 
reflecting a key myth or deed (such as the martyrdom of a regiment retires after the campaign season, or something far more 
prophet or the greatest victory of a hero). Decide where in elaborate such as a grand temple built at the heart of a city. Depend- 
your game calendar these official celebrations will appear and ing on their size and spread of their membership, Cults and Broth- 
their importance to members of different ranks. erhoods may have many properties or holy sites distributed across 

& What are the ceremonies for the organisation? Are they for- the world; although only one of these is considered the heart of the 
mal and highly ritualised such as a ritual offering at a temple organisation. 
or are they loosely structured and simple in approach, like The nature of these cult centres is related to the organisation to 
a street party hosted by a guild? Do different celebrations which it belongs, taking almost any form and appearance the Games 
require different ceremonies? Be as vague or as detailed as Master can imagine. Temples, shrines, groves, monasteries, guild 

205



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA MOoNAnSaTsEtRerIiEeSs AanNDd ScChHOoOoLlSs 
The cult of Myceras_focuses on the rushingflow of the battlefield, inner 

Sorcery and Mystical Orders tend to have monasteries or schools 
strength and the purtfying light of the sun. Anathaym must choose which of 

instead of temples (although the faculty might also provide a shrine 
these aspects of Myceras she willf ollow. She decides on motion since herf ocus 

as part of their facilities). The emphasis is more on study and con- 
up tll now has been her athletic fitness, prowess with weapons, and knowl- 

templation than on worship. Protection, at least in the case of sor- 
edge of lactics and strategy. As a Lay Member she is permitted to display 

cery orders, is provided by their diverse range of enchanted spells. 
Myceras’s holy symbol of movement openly, and so has it inscrebed on the 

Otherwise monasteries and schools have quite similar composi- 
breastplate of her armowr. She wants to have the glyph painted on her shield, 

tions to temples: use the Temple table provided earlier to determine 
but this tradition is reserved only for those who have performed certain services 

the composition of the educational facility, but use triple the number 
on behalf of the god, and so she must wait. 

of staff. All monasteries and schools offer training facilities, libraries, 
extensive dormitories and even infirmaries. Stabling will depend on 
the building’s location. 

houses, palaces, labyrinths, sanctuaries, fortresses, libraries, bastions, 
Rather than drawing large numbers of worshippers on particular 

necropolises, schools... the list is endless, as are the locations they 
holy days, monasteries and schools will have a number of Common 

can be found in. Not all such centres are buildings or static loca- 
Members, equal to five times the number of officers in residence, 

tions. Some can be wandering or mobile places such as floating sky- 
who act as servants, pilgrims, students, and so on. 

cities, drifting raft temples or even the insides of gargantuan, living 
creatures. 

Since there are so many permutations some rough guidelines are 
provided to describing the staffing and membership of these places. SaAmMPpLlEe ORrGgAaNnISisAaTtIioONnSs 
Games Masters are encouraged to add further detail about the The following are more fully detailed examples of some cults. 
organisational structure and additional facilities. Games Masters can use them as they are, changing names as 

needed, or more appropriately, use them as a guide for purpose-de- 

TEeMmPpLlEeSs veloped organisations in their own games. Each follows the same 

Temples are sacred places dedicated to one or more demons, structure which can be used as a template for developing bespoke 

gods or even spirits. A temple might have several smaller shrines cults or brotherhoods. 

within its confines, dedicated to other entities of the same pantheon 
NAaMmEe 

or different aspects of the same being. Temples vary in size but usu- 
The name and, sometimes, names, by which the organisation is 

ally have a retinue of staff responsible for the temple’s upkeep, and 
known. 

attending to the needs of the faithful — as well as presiding over the 
ceremonies conducted there. MYyTtHhOoSs aAnNDd HIiSstToORrYy 

Every temple is considered sacrosanct, and is protected by spells 
How the organisation came to be. 

of the appropriate magical discipline which are maintained by the 
higher ranked members. Theist temples, for instance, are protected NAaTtUuRrEe 
with Consecrate spells since they are important for the regaining of What the organisation represents; its place in society, and what it 
Theist miracles, and this holy ground helps establish the relation- seeks to achieve. Also listed here is how the organisation views, and 
ship with the god necessary for magical energy to be channelled treats apostate members. 
and replenished. They can also be places of healing, training, and 
sanctuary. The table below can be used to quickly determine the sta- ORrGgAaNnIiSsAaTtIioOnN 
tus, composition and facilities of a temple if one is needed in hurry. The organisation’s administration, distribution, celebrations or 

If needing a temple dedicated to the worship of spirits, perhaps holy days, important sites, and so on. 
venerating dead ancestors or infamous heroes, then simply exchange 
rank titles and magical skills with those of practicing animists. MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp 

The membership requirements for the organisation. If listed as 

SHhRrIinNEeSs Standard, then the default rank Requirements, Duties and Privileges 
as detailed on page 195 onwards of this chapter are used. 

Shrines are not nearly as organised as temples. They tend to be 
found near to places closely associated with the object of venera- REeSsTtRrIicCTtiIoOnNSs 
tion, and so can be found for both Theist and Animist traditions. The oaths, superstitions, and taboos of the organisation, where 
Most shrines have somewhere suited to either meditation or con- applicable, are detailed here. 
templation but are unsuited to large ceremonies that must be held 
outdoors (if the shrine is, indeed, large enough to be considered a SKkiiLlLls 
building). Shrines, if Theist, are protected by Consecrate spells, and Skills held important by the organisation, which it both teaches, 
Animist shrines are likely to be protected by a patron spirit. Only and form part of its rank requirements. The skills essential for cult 
larger shrines have a permanent custodian. Most lack anything but membership are listed in italics. Any skills that are taught as an extra 
the most basic facilities. benefit are listed in normal type. 

206



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

TemprpLlEe FAaCcIiLlIiTtIieESs 

Minor Temple Modest Temple Major Temple 

Usual Staff 1d3+3 1d6+9 2d6+12 

1d6+6 x Initiates: Devotion (Deity), Exhort 

1d3 x Initiates: Devotion (Deity), Exhort (Deity), 1d4+4 x Initiates: Devotion (Deity), Exhort (Deity), and three other cult skills at 50+1d10% 

and three other cult skills at 50+1d10% (Deity), and three other cult skills at 50+1d10% 1d4+3 x Acolytes: As Initiates but with 

1d2 x Acolytes: As Initiates but with Devotion 1d3+2 x Acolytes: As Initiates but with Devotion Devotion (Deity), Exhort (Deity), and two other 

Cult Rank and Cult (Deity), Exhort (Deity), and two other cult skills (Deity), Exhort (Deity), and two other cult skills cult skills at 70+1d10% 

Skill Levels at 70+1d10% at 70+1d10% 1d3+1 x Priests: As Acolytes but with Devotion 

1 x Priest: As Acolytes but with Devotion 1d2 x Priests: As Acolytes but with Devotion (Deity), Exhort (Deity), and one other cult skill 

(Deity), Exhort (Deity), and one other cult skill (Deity), Exhort (Deity), and one other cult skill at at 90+1d10% 

at 90+1d10% 90+1d10% 1 x High Priest: As Priests but with Devotion 

(Deity), Exhort (Deity) at 110+1d10% 

Shrines 1d3 1d3+1 1d6+2 

Training Facilities? Yes Yes Yes 

50% chance, but small (10+1d20 scrolls or 
Library Yes, medium (50+2d20 scrolls or books) Yes, large (100+2d100 scrolls or books) 

books) 

Lodgings No Yes — 2d3 beds Yes — 1d6+15 beds 

Stables Yes — 1d4 mounts or livestock Yes — 1d6+6 mounts or livestock Yes — 2d6+12 mounts or livestock 

SHhRrIinNEe FAaCcIiLlIiTtIieESs 

Minor Shrine Modest Shrine Major Shrine 

Usual Staff Oorl 1d3+1 

1d3 x Acolytes: As Initiates but with Devotion (Deity), 

Exhort (Deity), and two other cult skills at 70+1d10% 

1 x Priest: As Acolytes but with Devotion (Deity), 

Acolyte: Devotion (Deity), Exhort (Deity), and two Exhort (Deity), and one other cult skill at 90+1d10% 
Cult Rank and 

None other cult skills at 70+1d10%Shaman: Binding, OR 
Cult Skill Levels 

Trance, and two other cult skills at 70+1d10% 1d3 x Shaman: Binding, Trance, and two other cult 

skills at 70+1d10%]1 x High Shaman: As Shamans 

but with Binding, Trance, and one other cult skill at 

90+1d10% 

Small building or medium sized sacred area Medium sized building, or large sacred area (including 
Shrines Simple marker or sacred object 

(glade, stone circle, etc) a medicine lodge, stone circle temple, death house, etc 

Training Facilities? No No Yes 

Library No No 1d3 sheltered areas for sleeping 

Lodgings No Yes — 1d3 beds Yes — 1d3+3 beds 

Stables No No Yes — 1d3 mounts or livestock 

MAaGgIiCc ALlLlIiEeSs AanNDd ENnEeMmIiEeSs 
Specific to cults, this lists the magical disciplines and those spells, If an organisation has any specific alliances (or antipathies) with 

miracles, spirits and talents available to the organisation. another cult or brotherhood, they will be listed here, along with any 
specific benefits and hindrances these bring. 

GiiFfrts 
Gifts offered to the organisation’s members (usually only those 

of high rank). 

207



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

ANnCcEeSsTtoORr WOoRrSsHhIiPp SKkiiLlLls 
Binding, Dance, Insight, Lore (Ancestors), Perception, Sing, 

(AAnNMimiissTt CuuLlTt)) Trance. 

MYyTtHhOoSs AanNDd HIiSstToORrYy Maacgiic 
When those dear to the tribe leave this world they go to the Great Animism: can summon Ancestor spirits, Guardian spirits, and 

Spirit Caves where all the ancestors live and have lived, right back when necessary create Haunts. Shaman of the cult are allowed to 

to the time of the first men who made the tribe. Here the ancestors take a fetch. 

hunt, weave, and feast, never go hungry, defeat all their enemies, 
GIiFfTtSs 

and watch over the Land of the Living and the great tribe, offering 
High Shamans gain the Gift of Abstinence. They can do without 

their wisdom and protection. To enter the Great Spirit Caves is an 
one of the necessities all others need for survival. 

honour, and those who venerate the ancestors and heed their omens 
are guaranteed a place at the fire, a spear in the Great Hunt, and ALlLlIiEeSs AanNDd ENnEeMmIiEeSs 
fine cuts of meat from the kill. 

None. 

NAaTtUuRrEe 
The Ancestors are spirits of wisdom, hunting, weaving, and sur- DeeRrVvIiSshHEeSs oOFf tThHEe OPpEeNn 

vival. They continue in death as they did in life but are free from 
suffering, injury and disease. Through the ancestors the animal spir- SaAnNDds (MMyyssTtiicissmm Cuutlrt)) 
its can also be called and summoned by the shamans because the 
Ancestors are the masters of all animal spirits. The Ancestors pro- MYyTtHhOoSs aAnNDd HIiSstToORrYy 
vide guidance through omens, signs and portents. Their wisdom is in According to oral tradition, the Dervishes of the Open Sands 

the trees, the streams, the animals, the birds and the heavens. When have always haunted the deserts. Nobody remembers who the first 

the moon blocks the sun, that is the Ancestor’s sign for impending mystic was, nor does it matter to them. The sands are always open to 

war. When the locusts come that is the Ancestors’ sign for famine. those who wish to locate the truths behind reality, by suffering their 

The Ancestors speak through nature and greatest of all the Ances- heat, blindness, and scouring winds. 

tors are Grandfather and Grandmother who gave life to the tribe, Why the cult exists is unknown. Its purpose is is equally obscure. 

and taught it its ways: how to hunt; how to make fire; how to birth Those that cannot endure their loss, despair or self disgust, and who 

children, and how to weave. wander into the deserts will always find a path to their acceptant 
salvation from the Dervishes. 

ORrGgAaNnIiSsAaTtIioOnN 
The shamans of the tribe speak directly with the Ancestors, and NAaTtUuRrEe 

call upon the animal spirits through them. Grandfather’s Day is the The dervishes embrace the concepts of freedom, masochism, 

shortest day of the year, and Grandmother’s the longest. There are and physical self mastery. They exist only in the dry hot places of 

many holy places, such as the lightning tree on the lonely hill, and the world, unconsciously drawn to the punishing environment which 

the plunge-pool at the base of the waterfall. Here the Ancestors acts as a path to burn away their mortal sorrows and guilt, purifying 

can be heard most clearly by the shaman, although they can also the soul so that higher truths can be comprehended. 

be heard when the shaman make their great circle of ashes, and Find a lone dervish, and he will be a paragon of kindliness and 

perform the Parents’ Dance or the Hunting Dance. As the shamans hospitality, sharing what few possessions he has. But gather them 

speak with the Ancestors, so they are held holy: without them, the together, and they become a force for destructive chastisement. 

Ancestors will speak only through the signs and omens, and the ani- Their numbers never congregate save when they storm out of their 

mal spirits will not come. desert sanctuaries to perform an act of historical significance; oblit- 
erating those who stray from the path of virtue and right-thinking. 

MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp 
Standard. All males and females reaching the age of twelve ini- ORrGgAaNnIiSsAaTtIioOnN 

tiate into the cult. Males must spend three days and three nights in The Dervishes of the Open Sands have no formal organisation. 

the wilds, and survive, whilst the hunters hunt them. If caught, they They simply wander the deserts, alone, leading a life of extreme 

must spend the next year living as a female before they can attempt asceticism. Most of their time is spent gazing at the sun in deep 

the Hunt again, and so become men. meditation, purifying their soul with its burning light. Soon they 
become blind which releases them from distraction so that they can 

REeSsTtRrIicCTtiIoOnNSs truly perceive the world about them. Much of their time is spent 
in dance, which aids them to think at a higher level. Those who 

& When the moon obscures the sun, war is coming, achieve enlightenment often dance their way across the sands when 
& Killing an enemy when one becomes a Man shows greatness they travel. 

and purpose to the Ancestors. Since their fundamental philosophy is based on freedom of 
& Never kill a shaman; to do so is to be denied a place in the movement, the dervishes build no shrines or temples. The entire 

Great Spirit Caves and to bring doom to the tribe. desert is their sanctuary, whose tribulations are the scourge that frees 
their mind from their body. When someone enters their realm (mis- 
takenly or not), they are often found by a dervish a short while before 

208



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

death. The dervish will adopt the dying man as an aspirant if they on his bones, and his innards fell through his bowels, but he contin- 
feel that person is ready to undertake the journey of self discovery. ued in un-life, and continues still, high in the towers of the Black 
However, since all dervishes adopt the penance of silence it requires Tortress, served by his unloving army, and commanding all the crea- 
some effort on the supplicant’s part to comprehend what the dervish tures of the night. 
is offering them. 

Often a dervish will pass on their adopted aspirant to a mystic of NAaTtUuRrEe 
higher insight, so that he may learn a few more steps on the dervish Those sorcerers who would also command the undead and 

path to wisdom. Although no formal hierarchy is acknowledged, become un-living, like Arunis-Mort, join the order of the Lich Way, 

cult rank is used to demonstrate a level of enlightenment, and more and study the Invocations penned by Arunis-Sul. This is a cult of 

respect is given by cult members to a mystic of higher achievement. necromancers and death-cheaters; those who seek to prolong their 

The cult celebrates no particular holy days as such trivialities are existence beyond its physical limits, and to control the very nature of 

beneath consideration. death itself. The cult is hated because it takes the recently dead and 
makes slaves of them: zombies and skeletal servants. Its adherents 

 MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp commune with vampires and demons, practice foul rites including 
Standard. Only those who deliberately seck their death in the human sacrifice, and prey upon the innocent and unwitting. The 

desert, or lone travellers who accidentally stray into its wilder cult’s nature is corruption, and Arunis-Mort continues to rule over 
regions, are approached by a dervish and given the chance to live. his own creation as the Lich Lord supreme. 
This is as prosaic as following the dervish to the nearest source of 
food or water, which the dervish himself may not need. There are ORrGgAaNnIiSsAaTtIioOnN 
no age or race limits to those adopted into the cult, only the will to Arunis-Mort controls the cult from the Black Fortress. This 

learn the obscure habits and practices of their guardian. To achieve immense edifice of basalt and bone contains his army of the un-liv- 

the rank of Student and above, the mystic must render themselves ing, and many vile fiends from the depths of hell. The Lich Lord is 

blind by staring at the sun. the ultimate arch mage but the other high ranking members of the 
cult, the Mages and Champions, serve him directly and go forth to 

REeSsTtRrIicCTtiIoOnNSs do his bidding, and train the adepts of the cult. In time Arunis-Mort 
There are few formalised restrictions save that cult members are intends to create a kingdom of the un-living, and then an empire, 

forbidden to harm one another, personal possessions should be given corrupting all life as it goes. For this reason the order’s members are 
to others more in need of them, and that speaking is forbidden. secretive and solitary, never speaking of their true beliefs. However 

all initiates of the order are required to seek out the Black Fortress 
SKkIiLlLlSs and prostrate themselves before Arunis-Mort. Only then will they 

Dance, Endurance, Evade, Meditation, Mysticism (Dervish of be shown the secrets of the Ways of the Lich and, upon achieving 
the Open Sands), Perception, Survival. Mage status, be taught the Lich Rite so they too will cheat death. 

Maacgiic MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp 
Mysticism: Augment Endurance, Invoke Dark Sight, Invoke Standard. Sorcerers who join the order must pledge secrecy and 

Denial (Food), Invoke Denial (Water), Invoke Indomitable, Invoke discretion. Failure to maintain either results in the miscreant being 
Life Sense, Enhance Fatigue. hunted by one of the six vampire lords Arunis-Mort commands, and 

being made a slave in the Black Fortress for eternity. 
GriFfts 

Gifts are gained according to cult rank. Dervishes who achieve REeSsTtRrIicCtTiIoOnNSs 
the rank of Disciple receive the gift of Robust, those ranked Master See Gifts below. 
receive Invulnerability to Fire/Heat, whilst the few who reach Sage 
receive Oracle. SKkiiLlLls 

Deceit, Invocation (Way of the Lich), Lore (Arunis-Mort), Shap- 
ALlLlIiEeSs aAnNDd ENnEeMmIiEeSs ing, Willpower. 

Dervishes are both disliked and feared by all who live on the 
borders of the deserts. Since the mystics restrict their travels to the MAaGgIiCc 
deepest, most remote areas it is rare that they encounter civilisation. Sorcery: Abjure (Decay), Animate (Bone), Dominate (Undead), 
When they do, dervishes are accorded no civility or service: in fact if Enchant, Sculpt (Corpse), Revivify, Sense (Death), Undeath. 
the mystic appears vulnerable they will be actively persecuted. 

GiiFfts 
ThHEe LicchH WAaYy (SSoORrccCery Cuurlrt)) Upon reaching the rank of Adept, sorcerers of the cult are 

brought to the Black lortress and permitted to take one of the fol- 

MYyTtHhOoSs AanNDd HIiSstToORrYy lowing gifts: Eternal Life, Invulnerability, and Mighty, but only in 
exchange for being cursed with a dire Geas worded to support Aru- 

Arunis-Sul discovered the spells that master death, and created 
nis-Mort or complete one of his myriad plans. With each increase 

the tome called, in the common tongue, Ways of the Lich. As his 
in rank the sorcerer may take one of the remaining gifts, eventually 

own time in the world came to an end his followers performed the 
turning the sorcerer into an immortal, un-living monstrosity. 

Lich Rite just as Arunis-Sul had formulated it, and so Arunis-Sul did 
not die but became Arunis-Mort, the Lich Lord. The skin withered 

209



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

ALlLlIiEeSs aAnNDd ENnEeMmIiEeSs REeSsTtRrIicCtTiIoOnNSs 
All are enemies of this diabolical cult. None are allies. 

& Never leave the battlefield with your back to an enemy 
& Never go to war or fight whilst rain falls from the sky 

MyycceerAas (ThHEeIiSstT CuuLlTt)) & Never eat the flesh of a bull without casting its heart and loins 
on a fire as an offering to Myceras 

MYyTtHhOoSs AanNDd HIiSstToORrYy 
In the ancient days when men were but children, a great serpent 

came to the land and consumed everything. The children were hun- SKkIiLlLlSs 
gry and scared. Darkness came with the serpent and plunged all into Brawn, Devotion, Endurance, Exhort, Lore (Herding), Unarmed, 

night. Then, one day, as Araxis the First Tender watched his herd Meerish Infantry Combat Style. 

of cows and bulls, one of the bulls spoke to him. ‘Make a sacrifice 
MAaGgIiCc 

to the sun, and all shall be restored.” So Araxis led his finest heifer 
Lay Members with an aptitude for Folk Magic may learn up to 

to the foot of the Great Plateau, and made it an offering. Then the 
three appropriate Folk Magic spells. The cult teaches Bladesharp, 

stars began to fall as spears, their bright tails dismissing the darkness. 
Coordination and Might. Initiates gain access to the skills of The- 

From the heavens was a thunderous bellow, and as Araxis watched 
ism, and can pray for miracles. 

a vast, bull headed giant came down from the sky, its body wreathed 
Miracles offered are Beast Form, Berserk, Clear Skies, Conse- 

in flame. The serpent rose up to challenge the bull god, but as they 
crate, Fortify, Sacred Band, Shield and Sunspear. 

wrestled the bright countenance of Myceras burned the serpent 
and thus defeated, he bound the beast within a tomb imprisoned GiiFfts 
in shackles of eternal fire. With this, the sun returned to the world. 

Those who show true and selfless dedication to the cult, whatever 
Myceras taught the people of the hills how to use the sling, and 

their rank, are gifted with Robust. High Priests are gifted with either 
spear. He taught them the arts of war, and how to raise their herds 

Oracle for those who wish to retire to a life of ascetic contemplation, 
so none would ever be hungry again. He taught them the ways of 

or Summon for more active cult leaders. This latter gift calls forth a 
the beasts, and how to farm them and care for them. Finally he 

divine bull which acts as a bodyguard and mount for the fortunate 
showed them how to make the Army so that the serpent and its 

recipient. Treat as an Aurochs. 
followers could be challenged. So was Myceras born and returned 
to the world. ALlLlIiEeSs AanNDd ENnEeMmIiEeSs 

The Serpent God Yethis is the traditional enemy of Myceras. 
NAaTtUuRrEe 

The cult considers all ophidians as enemies, as well as those who 
Myceras is a diverse cult. He is both the God of War, the God of 

learn sorcery. 
Farmers and Herders, and the protector God of the city of Meeros. 

In addition, cults which fail to show proper subservience to Myc- 
He teaches his followers never to be still and never to be compliant. 

eras are also considered enemies, and by association those cities 
He teaches bravery and fearlessness in the face of the enemy, and 

which dare to host them. 
brings the truth that the herd is the centre of all community. 

His different aspects are represented as a minotaur as the God of 
War, as a pure bull as the God of the Herd, and as a flame-wreathed 
man as the Lord of Light and Fire. ExXAaMmPpLlEe 
ORrGgAaNnIiSsAaTtIioOnN ORrGgAaNnISisAaTtIioONnSs 

The Cult of Myceras is based on a formal priesthood that leads The following tables provide a rough selection of many different 
all ceremonies and rituals. The Great Temple of Myceras is the cen- types of cult or brotherhood which can be easily modified to fit into 
tral place of worship although many smaller temples and shrines a campaign setting. They have not been designed with any sense of 
are found throughout the land, each dedicated to one or two of his game balance, only to illustrate particular themes which should be 
aspects. The sacrifice of cows is common: any pure-white heifer fleshed out as with the previous examples. 
born in a herd is marked as a bride of Myceras, and sacrificed on These cults are useful as off-the-cuff references if an organisation 
the mid-summer eve in the Fesitival of Light which marks Myceras’ is needed in a hurry (to identify likely skills offered for training, and 
return to the world. a subset of likely magic to select from). 

MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp 
Standard. Only warriors are permitted to become lay members 

although this is not compulsory. Initiates and above must abandon 
the pursuit of arms, and be dedicated wholly to Myceras’s service as 
one of his priesthood, a path sometimes taken by retiring soldiers. 

210



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

ANnmimmisisTtiic CuuLlTts 

Cult Name Standard Skills Professional Skills Spirits 

Ancestor Cult Clustoms, Insight, Perception Binding, Lore (Ancestors), Trance Ancestors 

Al Athletics, Evade, Ride Binding, Lore (Animal Spirit), Trance Animal Spirits, Predator Spirits 

Nature Spirit Insight, Locale, Willpower Binding, Lore ¢ (Nature Spirit), Trance Nature Spirits, associated Animal Spirits 

Binding, Lore ( (Healing Spirit), Healing, 
Healing Spirit Endurance, First Aid Healing Spirit, Guardian Spirits 

Trance 

Disease Spirit Influence, Willpower, Endurance Lore (Disease Spirit), Trance Disease Spirits, perhaps Curse Spirits 

BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 
Brotherhood Type Standard Skills Professional Skills 

Alchemical Society Insight, Perception, Willpower Lore (Alchemy), Lore (Minerals) 

Astrological/ Astronomical Fellowship Insight, Perception Lore (Astrology), Lore (Astronomy), Lore (Mathematics) 

College/ University Alumni Ciustoms, Influence, Willpower Lore (Any Two) 

Criminal Fraternity Conceal, Deceit, Endurance Disguise, Sleight 

Masons Endurance, Insight, Locale Craft (Masonry), Engineering 

Mercenary Company Athletics, Evade, Two Combat Styles Lore (Strategy and Tactics) 

Merchant Venturers Influence, Perception Commerce, Navigate, Seamanship 

Midwives First Aid, Influence, Locale Healing, Lore (Midwifery) 

Physicians Tirst Aid, Insight, Locale Healing, Lore (Herbs) 

Political Party or Movements Clustoms or Deceit, Influence, Insight Orate, Lore (Politics) 

Ship’s Company Athletics, Boating, Endurance Navigate, Seamanship 

Thieves’/Assassins’ Guild Conceal, Deceit, Evade, One Combat Style Sleight 

Trade and Craft Guild Clustoms, Perception Commerce, Craft (Appropriate to the Guild) 

Athletics, Brawn, Evade, Endurance, One Combat Style 
Warband Lore (Strategy and Tactics) 

Appropriate to the Band 

MoysTticissmm Cuurlts 

Cult Name Standard Skills Professional Skills Paths 

The Way of All Knowledge Augment Insight, Augment Language, 
Monastic Order of Language (any), Literacy, Lore (any), 

None Augment Lore, Invoke Aura (Wisdom), Invoke Awareness, Invoke Denial 
Epistemology Meditation, Mysticism 

(Ignorance), Invoke Magic Sense 

Path of Healing 

Brotherhood of the Augment Endurance, Augment First Aid, Augment Healing, Invoke Disease 
First Aid, Locale Healing, Meditation, Mysticism 

Healing Hands Immunity, Invoke Poison Immunity, Enhance Healing Rate, Enhance 

Fatigue 

Path of Shadows 

School of Augment Perception, Augment Stealth, Augment Unarmed, Augment 
Perception, Stealth Sleight, Meditation, Mysticism 

Impenetrable Silence Ranged Combat Style, Invoke Adhesion, Invoke Dark Sight, Enhance 

Movement 

Path of Deceit 
Tellowship of the 

Deceit, Influence Oratory, Meditation, Mysticism Augment Conceal, Augment Deceit, Augment Influence, Augment Sleight, 
Snake 

Augment Willpower, Invoke Night Sight, Enhance Movement 

Way of the Tiger 

Augment Athletics, 

Augment Brawn, Augment 

School of the Endurance, Augment 
Athletics, Unarmed Survival, Meditation, Mysticism 

Leaping Tiger Unarmed, Invoke Formidable 

Natural Weapons, Enhance 

Action Points, Enhance 

Damage Modifier 

211



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

MyyssTtiicismm Cuutlts (CCoONnTtIinNUuEeDd)) 
Cult Name Standard Skills Professional Skills Paths 

Way of Abjuration 

Augment Endurance, Augment Survival, Invoke Denial (Food), Invoke 
Order of Asceticism Endurance, Willpower Survival, Meditation, Mysticism 

Denial (Water), Invoke Denial (Sleep), Enhance Fatigue, Enhance Hit 

Points 

Way of Reason 

School of Augment Customs, Augment Influence, Augment Insight, Augment 
Customs, Influence Lore (any), Meditation, Mysticism 

Enlightened Being Willpower, Invoke Aura (Authority), Invoke Aura (Wisdom), Enhance 

Initiative 

SoORrCcEeRrYy CUuLlTtSs 

Cult Name Standard Skills Professional Skills Spells 

Lore (Strategy and Tactics), Invocation, Attract Missile, Bypass Armour, Damage Enhancement, Damage 
Military Order Combat Style, Unarmed 

Shaping Resistance, Haste, Protective Ward, Transfer Wound 

Abjure (Decay), Dominate (Undead), Revivify, Spirit Resistance, Transfer 
Necromantic Order Endurance, Willpower Lore (Undead), Invocation, Shaping 

Wound, Trap Soul, Undeath 

Commerce, Lore (Alchemy), Diminish (Characteristic), Enlarge, Holdfast, Neutralise Magic, Sculpt 
Alchemical Order Locale 

Invocation, Shaping (Substance), Shrink, Transmogrify (to Substance) 

Abjure (Process), Intuition, Mystic (Sense), Neutralise Magic, Perceive 
Scholastic Order Insight, Perception Lore (any), Invocation, Shaping 

(Sense), Project (Sense), Sense (Knowledge) 

Abjure (Substance), Banish, Damage Resistance, Mystic (Sense), 
Hermetic Order Perception, Willpower Lore (any), Invocation, Shaping 

Protective Ward, Spirit Resistance, Spell Resistance 

Castback, Enslave (Creatures), Evoke (Entity), Imprison, Smother, Tap 
Dark Forces Order Insight, Stealth Disguise, Invocation, Shaping 

(Characteristic), Wrack 

Communication Tly, Haste, Intuition, Phantom (Sense), Project (Sense), Telepathy, 
Customs, Influence Language (any), Invocation, Shaping 

Order Teleport 

Abjure, Damage Resistance, Neutralise Magic, Palsy, Regenerate, 
Medical Order First Aid, Locale Healing, Invocation, Shaping 

Repulse (Vermin), Transfer Wound 

Dominate (Creatures), Draw (Creatures), Enhance (Characteristic), 
Transmutation Order Endurance, Unarmed Lore (Creatures), Invocation, Shaping 

Haste, Perceive (Sense), Shapechange (to Creature), Switch Body 

THhEeIistT CUuLlTtSs 
Cult Name Standard Skills Professional Skills Miracles 

Berserk, Call Winds, Clear Skies, Cloud Call, Dismiss Elemental, 
Air God: Athletics, Evade 

Air/Storm God Devotion, Exhort, Survival Elemental Summoning (Sylph), Lightning, Rain of Hail, Sacred Band, 
Storm God: Athletics, Brawn 

Shield, Thunderclap 

Backlash, Dismiss Magic, Fortify, Harmonise, Leeching, Mindlink, 
Crafter God Brawn, Endurance Craft (Any), Devotion, Exhort 

Pacify, Perseverance, Steadfast, True (Weapon) 

Aegis, Backlash, Bind Ghost, Corruption, Dismiss Magic, Fear, Heart 
Influence, Willpower, Combat 

Death God Devotion, Exhort Seizure, Lay to Rest, Raise Undead, Sever Spirit, Soul Sight, Spirit 
Style 

Block, True (Weapon) 

Devotion, Exhort, and either Absorption, Backlash, Dismiss Elemental, Earthquake, Elemental 

Earth God Brawn, Locale Engineering or Lore (Mining or Summoning (Gnome), Fortify, Lay to Rest, Propitiate, Rain of Stones, 

Smithing) Sacred Band, Shield, Steadfast 

Craft (Farming or Husbandry), Beast Form, Bless Crops, Clear Skies, Cloud Call, Dismiss Magic, 
Tertility Goddess Endurance, Locale 

Devotion, Exhort Entangle, Enthrall, Fecundity, Growth, Heal Wound, Pacify, Ripen 

Cure Malady, Cure Sense, Dismiss Magic, Exorcism, Fecundity, Heal 

Healing God First Aid, Endurance Devotion, Exhort, Healing Body, Heal Mind, Heal Wound, Lay to Rest, Pacify, Rejuvenate, 

Resurrect 

Beast Form, Chameleon, Cloud Call, Dismiss Magic, Entangle, 

Hunter God Athletics, Stealth Devotion, Exhort, Track Harmonise, Illusion, Lay to Rest, Pacify, Shield, Sureshot, True 

(Weapon) 

Devotion, Exhort, Lore (Character’s Dismiss Magic, Heal Mind, Mindblast, Mindlink, Obliterate, Propitiate, 
Knowledge God Clustoms, Perception 

Choice) Reflection, Soul Sight, Spirit Block, Steadfast 

212



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

THheeiistT Cuutlts (CCoONnTtIinNUuEeDd)) 
Cult Name Standard Skills Professional Skills Miracles 

Beast Form, Breathe Water, Call Winds, Dismiss Elemental, Elemental 
Devotion, Exhort, and either Craft 

Sea/Water God Boating, Swim . i Summoning (Undine), Perseverance, Propitiate, Sacred Band, Steadfast, 
(Fishing) or Seamanship 

Thunderclap 

Acgis, Clear Skies, Dismiss Elemental, Elemental Summoning 

Sun God/Fire God Influence, Insight Devotion, Exhort, Oratory (Salamander), Fear, Tllusion, Leeching, Mirage, Rain of Fire, Sacred 

Band, Shield, Sunspear 

Dismiss Magic, Enthrall, Illusion, Mindlink, Pacify, Perseverance, 
Trading God Customs, Insight Commerce, Devotion, Exhort 

Propitiate, Reflection, Soul Sight 

Absorption, Backlash, Beast Form, Chameleon, Corruption, Dismiss 

Trickster God Conceal, Deceit Devotion, Disguise, Exhort Magic, Enthrall, Fear, Harmonise, Illusion, Madness, Mirage, Soul 

Sight 

Acgis, Berserk, Dismiss Magic, Fortify, Perseverance, Reflection, Sacred 
War God Combat Style, Evade, Endurance ~ Devotion, Exhort 

Band, Shield, Steadfast, Sureshot, True (Weapon) 

THhEeIiSstT MIiRrAaCcLlEeSs 
The muracles listedfor each of the generic Theist Culls are merely a broad range of suggestions. from which a cult can select its own unique subset of spe- 

cialist magues (see How Many Abilities?, page 114). The miracles Awaken, Behold, Consecrate, Excommunicate and Extenswon tend to be ubiquitous across 
most cults - although this is not always the case. When choosing muracles offered by a particular type of cult Games Masters should consider including one or 
more of these five miracles as part of those offered in its portfolio; but must take into account the cult's nature when making a decision on which of them would 
be relevant or useful to it. For instance, a War God cult might offer Awaken and Consecrate as part of its maracles, whilst a Trickster cult might instead offer 
Behold, Excommunicate and Extension. 
N - 

213



