Mythras:  Folk Magic

| U G S [ R L L= = 1 1 LU SO QR <N < A o B | = < <Gl 

Folk Magic
| U G S [ R L L= = 1 1 I & KB A B« 7 o XN 

olk Magic is the lowest level of magic available to MYTHRAS 

F characters. Depending on the setting Folk Magic represents: AccCcEesss TtoO FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc 
Given its nature Folk Magic can be accessed in a number of dif- 

& Simple cantrips and spells taught within a community to aid 
ferent ways: 

daily chores and tasks 
& The magic of hedge wizards and witches who have not & Through a culture reflecting secrets known by a social group. 

exposed themselves to the higher forms of magic & Through a career representing knowledge used by a vocation. 
& A magical tradition with wide accessibility but a relatively low & Through a cult or brotherhood that has, over time, mastered 

level of power these magical forces. 
& Through an individual practitioner who may be willing to 

Although Folk Magic might appear to be weak in comparison 
share their knowledge. 

with magical approaches such as animism, theism and sorcery it can, 
& Through self-realisation from study or inner connection with 

if used wisely, be a very powerful tool. The balance comes in its rel- 
the world about them. 

ative ubiquity: Folk Magic may be more commonplace and easier to 
learn which leads to a wider range of use whilst not necessarily being Games Masters need to decide how Folk Magic is made available. 
confined to specialists. It might be very common, with every cultural group having access to 

certain spells that aid and support daily life. Or it might be restricted 
to specific groups or individuals, with the uninitiated aware of its 

THhEe NAaTtUuRrEe oOFf existence but unable to use it. Depending on the campaign setting, 
not every character can or should have access to magic. 

FoilLk MAaGgIiCc 
Tolk Magic is an unseen force that permeates the world and is STtaARrTtIinNgG FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc 

not derived from the gods but is an echo of the very earliest stages of As an exception to the general rule of thumb, characters from 

creation. Maybe it comes from life force, geomancy or perhaps the careers which specialise in Folk Magic may start with a number of 

cosmic radiance of constellations, but, whatever its source, its power spells equal to one tenth of their Folk Magic skill. 

is ubiquitous to those who know how to tap it. In campaigns where everyday people are permitted to pick up 

Tolk Magicians have attuned their senses to this faint resonance, the skill as a hobby or as part of their cult or culture, non-magi- 

tapping into the background energy to work magic on mundane cal career characters only start with the default number of spells as 

things around them. In worlds where magic is limited, these magi- described in the previous chapter (see Starting Magic on page 118). 

cians are valued for the small charms and blessings they can provide These default values may be changed as the Games Master 

to their community. In settings where it is more commonplace, peo- desires. 

ple use petty magics to ease their lives, aiding them in daily chores. 
Since the focus of Folk Magic is to reduce effort or augment com- LeEaArRnNIinNgG FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc 

fort, few of its spells are overtly specialised in the ways of death and Folk Magic is usually taught by someone skilled in its use. If avail- 
combat. Those arts are left to practitioners of higher magics. able culturally or professionally then such teachers are likely to have 

taught Folk Magic during a character’s formative years. If being 
learned during the course of a campaign, it costs three Experience 
Rolls, and takes one week to learn a new Folk Magic spell. 

121



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc 

Learning spells may also come with a monetary cost — depending Career Suggested Folk Magic 
on the teacher and perhaps the spell. Precise costs will be dependent 

Bladesharp, Find, Mobility, Pathway, Preserve, Slow, 
on circumstances, but as a general rule it costs 100 Silver of goods or Hunter i 

Speedart, Vigour, Warmth 
services per spell. Games Masters should adjust the base cost accord- 

Alarm, Appraise, Calculate, Cleanse, Find, Glamour, 
ing to how common lolk Magic is generally, who is teaching it, and Merchant . 

Lock, Translate, Voice 
whether or not the student has the benefit of cult or brotherhood 

. Bludgeon, Breath, Find, Ignite, Light, Might, Pierce, 
membership, special friendships, and so on. Tuition in Folk Magic Miner Lo 

Repair, Vigour 
may also be free in certain circumstances: attaining a particular rank 

i Avert, Befuddle, Demoralise, Find, Heal, Mindspeech, 
in a cult, say, or in recognition of services rendered. Mystic S . o B 

Spiritshield, Vigour, Witchsight 
Tor example a Healing cult might offer tuition in the Heal spell at 

. Alarm, Calculate, Find, Glamour, Lock, Mindspeech, 
arate of 50 Silvers to its members; whereas a local witch might offer Official . . . 

Translate, Ventriloquism, Voice 
to teach the spell at a base rate of 150 Silvers to the same student. A 
mother might even offer to teach her child the spell for free when he . Breath, Calm, Cleanse, Cool, Find, Heal, Preserve, Sleep, 

Physician 
Warmth 

or she leaves home for the wide world. 
If a Games Master wishes, professional folk magicians may Priest Any 

develop new spells for a suitable cost in Experience Rolls and time. ol Bladesharp, Deflect, Dry, Extinguish, Find, Pierce, Repair, 
ailor 

As a rough guideline, use the incrementing costs as presented on the Vigour, Warmth 

Creating New Traditions table on page 119. Appraise, Calculate, Calm, Extinguish, Find, Mindspeech, 
Scholar . . 

Tidy, Translate, Voice 

. Bladesharp, Bypass, Find, Incognito, Mobility, Pathway, 
cout 

UsbiiQquuiTittoous Speedart, Vigour, Warmth 

Shaman Any 

FoilLk MAaGgIiCc Sorcerer Any 

Thicf Bypass, Coordination, Darkness, Demoralise, Find, Glue, 
The table below is included for those campaigns where Folk ie 

Knock, Mobility, Ventriloquism 
Magic is available to common folk, rather than being restricted to 

. Bladesharp, Bludgeon, Coordination, Fanaticism, 
specialist hedge wizards and witches. Fach of the standard careers Warrior 

Firearrow, Fireblade, Find, Protection, Vigour 
has been presented with a list of generic spells useful to that partic- 
ular profession. 

Note: In regions predisposed to great heat rather than winter cold, any career offering 
Some spells are more prevalent than others, and Games Mas- 

Warmth as a spell can substitute itfor Cool instead (and vice-versa). 
ters are encouraged to tweak the lists to fit their campaign. For 
example, ostensibly similar careers may differ by one or two spells 
depending on the background culture and environment. Some of 
the rarer spells may be available to members of particular cults or UssIinNgG FoLlkK MAaGgIiCc 
brotherhoods. Tolk Magic takes only a single Turn to cast.Each spell costs one 

Magic Point which is deducted from the Magic Point total when- 
CAaRrEeEeRr--SSPpEeCcIiFfIicC FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc SPpEeLlLlSs ever it is successfully cast. Casting any spell successfully requires a 

Career Suggested Folk Magic Tolk Magic roll. The Folk Magic skill covers every spell a character 

Alarm, Befuddle, Bladesharp, Bypass, Find, Incognito, knows. Thus, a character with Folk Magic 70% would cast all their 
Agent - . 

Knock, Mimic, Ventriloquism Tolk Magic spells at this level: Folk Magic spells do not have discrete 
skill ratings. 

Alchemist Any 
If the Folk Magic roll is a... 

Beastcall, Find, Might, Mobility, Pathway, Pet, Slow, 
Beast Handler i 

Speedart, Vigour & Critical Success: the spell’s Magic Point cost is zero. 
Alarm, Appraise, Befuddle, Calm, Cleanse, Find, & Success: the caster loses | Magic Point and the spell works 

Courtesan 
Glamour, Sleep, Tune successfully. 

. Babel, Calculate, Calm, Fanaticism, Find, Glamour, & Failure: the caster loses 1 Magic Point, but the spell does not 
Courtier . . 

Mindspeech, Translate, Voice work. 
Appraise, Bladesharp, Calculate, Coordination, Find, & Fumble: the caster loses 1d3 Magic Points for the spell and 

Crafter A i . 
Ironhand, Pierce, Polish, Repair the spell fails to work. 

. Babel, Calm, Find, Glamour, Light, Mimic, Tune, 
Entertainer i i i Due to their minor or petty nature, all Folk Magic spells have a 

Ventriloquism, Voice 
default Intensity and Magnitude of 1. 

Beastcall, Bladesharp, Calculate, Find, Might, Preserve, 
Farmer . 

Repair, Vigour, Warmth 

i Beastcall, Deflect, Dry, Find, Pierce, Preserve, Repair, LimMiiTts TtoO FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc CAaPpAaCcIiTtYy 
Fisherman . 

Vigour, Warmth Characters have no actual limit to the number of Folk Magic 

Alarm, Beastcall, Find, Heat, Pathway, Pet, Slow, spells they can learn, provided that the Games Master permits them 
Herder 

Speedart, Warmth to have access to new ones. Such knowledge might be restricted or 
unavailable in the game world. 

122



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FOoolLkK MAaGgIiCc 

FoLlk MAaGgIiCc SPpEeLlLlSs ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Anathaym has never learned any FolkM agic as 1ts teaching has tradition- 

Tolk Magic spells are defined by various traits defining the effects ally been restructed to Meeros’s cults, and the priesthood. However Anathaym’s 
of the spell, and any particular limitations. Every spell is different sister, Kara, s an acolyte of Myceras, and has been learming Folk Maguc as 
with some having fewer traits than others. part of her own training 

While Anathaym recovers from the injuries to her right hand, Rara uses 

DuurraaTtIioOnN oOFf FoOLlkK the time to teach her the Bladesharp spell - a useful warrior’s cantrip, and one 
generally learned by Meeros’s soldiers. 

MAaGgIiCc SPpEeLlLlSs 
Unless a spell has either the Concentration or Instant traits it has 

TRrIigGgGEerR 
a natural duration which lasts the entire scene or action for which 

Trigger spells can be cast successfully but have their effects 
the spell was used. A few spells have custom durations noted in the 

delayed by the caster. If the spell is not triggered during the scene it 
spell’s definition. For example, using Pathway to traverse a section of 

dissipates naturally. 
thorny and overgrown woodland would last until the terrain clears, 
and the spell is no longer necessary. 

TrrRaAIitTSs SPpEeLlLlSs 
Tolk Magic Traits are as follows: 

ALlaArRmM 
COoNnCcEeNnTtRrAaTtIioOnN 

Special Duration 
The spell’s effects remain in place as long as the caster continues 

Casting Alarm on a location such as a room or small clearing 
to concentrate on maintaining it. Concentration requires the caster 

creates a temporary psychic bond between the area and the caster. 
to be free of all physical and mental distractions: any such distur- 

If the area is accessed by a living creature with a SIZ greater than 
bance interrupts the concentration, resulting in the spell’s immediate 

1, the caster is automatically made aware that something has trans- 
dismissal. 

gressed no matter how great the distance. The Alarm is usually a 

InNsStTaAnNTt distinct tingling sensation or mental twinge which will awaken the 

The spell’s effects happen immediately. It has no duration. caster. Alarm can also be used on an individual object, triggering 
when touched or moved. 

RAaNnGgEeDd The spell does not determine who or what has crossed the 

Spells with the Ranged trait can be cast at a distance of up to the alarmed threshold, and neither does it prevent ingress. It lasts until 

character’s Folk Magic score in metres. The caster must know the triggered, but the Magic Point used to cast it does not recover until 

location of the target, such as ‘hiding behind the door’: if they are the spell is dismissed or concludes naturally. Once activated Alarm 

unable to directly see or sense the target of the spell, then the Folk must be cast again. 

Magic roll becomes one grade harder. 

APpPpRrAaIiSsEe 
ReessiistT (EEnNdDUuRrAaNnCcEe,, EVvAaDdEe,, WIiLlLlpPoOWwEeRr)) 

Instant, Touch 
Any spell that is not readily accepted by a target can be actively 

Appraise allows the immediate assessment of the quality of phys- 
resisted using either Endurance, Evade or Willpower, as determined 

ical goods of combined ENC or SIZ equal to the caster’s POW. The 
by this trait. To successfully resist a spell, the target must win an 

spell determines whether or not identical looking items are of the 
opposed roll of the relevant skill against the caster’s Folk Magic cast- 

same or similar quality, or if one or more is either flawed or of a 
ing result. If the target fails in the opposed roll then the spell takes 

higher quality. The spell does not work on organic things, only on 
effect as normal. Note that resisting is usually a passive action if 

inanimate objects. Neither does it determine what flaws or enhance- 
Endurance or Willpower are the being used. If a spell requires the 

ments are present; merely that they exist. 
target to Evade then it costs an Action Point to make the Evade 
attempt. Targets without Action Points to spend in evading will 
therefore be powerless against the spell’s effect. AVvEeRrTt 

Instant, Ranged 

ToucHh Avert 1s used to dismiss another Folk Magic spell within range. 
The caster must be in physical contact with the target whilst the Avert can be cast reactively to neutralise offensive spells, by using the 

spell is cast. If a target is intent on resisting physical contact then the Counter Magic Reactive Action. 
caster will most likely fail to complete his spell unless some specific 
circumstance prevents the target’s withdrawal, such as surprise or BAaBbBbLlEe 
the Grip special effect. A touch spell merely needs to contact the 

Resist (Willpower), Touch 
target or its carried accoutrements in order to work. 

Babble mangles anything spoken by its target. It does not affect 
what the target is thinking, only what is verbally issued. Thus Babble 
can seriously disrupt orders being issued by a commanding officer to 
his troops, but it cannot influence what the commander is thinking 

123



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc 

or his intentions. Depending on the necessity for verbal components, BLluUdDgGEeoOnN 
Babble may be able to adversely influence spell casting. 

Touch 
Bludgeon is similar to Bladesharp but used on weapons and tools 

BeasstcaLlLl (XX ) that deal blunt-force trauma rather than cutting or piercing damage. 
Instant, Ranged, Resist (Willpower) It is normally used to aid with threshing grain, fulling wool, or sim- 
Beastcall is used to attract a single, specific animal, the type being ilar heavy duty work. 

specified in the spell, within range. The animal summoned cannot 
be sapient, and it may also resist the spell using its Willpower. If it BRrEeAatThH 
fails to resist, it is naturally drawn, in a passive fashion, to the caster, 

Touch 
whereupon the spell dissipates, and the creature acts as it normally 

Breath permits the recipient to hold their breath for an extended 
would, finding itself in proximity to the caster. Physical obstacles 

period, so that they can temporarily venture into harmful environ- 
or adverse actions (such as a wall, river or line of spears, or a harsh 

ments, such as underwater; or atmospheres tainted by rock dust, 
yank on a set of reins or leash) also cause the spell to fail. 

gases, smoke or poisons. The spell lasts for a maximum of half the 
caster’s POW in minutes, during which time the recipient cannot 

BEeFfuUDdDdLlEe speak or the breath is lost, and they immediately begin to asphyxiate 
Ranged, Resist (Willpower) (or become poisoned). 
Befuddle causes confusion within the mind of a corporeal target. 

The subject of the spell has difficulty thinking straight, forgetting ByrpAasss 
where it is, what it is doing, and why — often lapsing into disassoci- 

Touch, Trigger 
ated lines of thought. Befuddled targets can still act in self defence, 

Bypass is used to cross the threshold of an area under the effect 
but cannot initiate any constructive activity until the spell ends. 

of an Alarm spell without triggering the Alarm. When cast the spell 
Any sort of attack or threatening action instantly breaks the spell, 

is held in preparation, triggering on contact with an Alarm spell. Of 
whether or not it was directed specifically at the befuddled target. 

course the caster must suspect that an Alarm spell exists in the first 
place. Bypass does not negate the Alarm, and it must be cast for each 

BLlaADdEeSshHAaRrPp crossing of the Alarm spell’s threshold. 
Touch 
Bladesharp is cast on edged and piercing melee weapons. It CAaLlCcUuLlAaTtEe 

increases the damage of a weapon by one dice step, and inciden- 
Instant, Ranged 

tally leaves the edge honed after the spell concludes. This spell is 
Calculate allows the immediate calculation of numbers, weight 

often used on tools such as logging axes, ploughs and razors. Thus 
or size of a thing, be it soldiers amassed in battle formation, the 

casting this spell on a dagger increases it to 1d6+1 damage, whereas 
length of a rope or weight of a sack of rice. The spell always yields 

the same spell on a great axe would increase it to 2d8+2 damage. 
a precise quantity, but not value or quality. Only items which are 

(1d4>1d6>1d8>1d10>2d6>2d8>2d10) 
directly observable (seen, lifted, smelled, and so on), and within 
range can be calculated. The spell will work when cast on a con- 
tainer — assuming, of course, that the container is not empty. 

CaAlMm 
Ranged, Resist (Waillpower) 
Calm attempts to dampen down the passions or the target, 

perhaps ensuring that a lovesick paramour doesn’t press his suit, 
a frightened rival doesn’t scream for help or that weapons are not 
drawn in anger. A calmed person is not otherwise mentally affected, 
thus any sort of assault or threatening action still permits the target 
to defend themselves, and even attack, albeit they will do so in a calm 
and level headed manner. 

CHhIiLlLl 
Instant, Touch 
Chill dramatically reduces the temperature of small objects (with 

an ENC no larger than a third of the caster’s POW) down to the 
temperature of ice water. Useful for rapidly cooling hot items, chill- 
ing drinks, and so forth. The spell does not freeze an object, and 
neither does it cause any damage to its structure: it merely renders 
it very cold. 

124



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FOoolLkK MAaGgIiCc 

CLlEeaANnSsEe DEeMmOoRArLaIliSsEe 
Instant, Touch Ranged, Resist (Waillpower) 
Cleanse is used to rid an object, person or small area of dirt, Demoralise temporarily fills the target with a sense of despon- 

grease, grime, bad smells, and so on. It does not organise or tidy the dency towards a particular person, species, situation or object. When 
target or area; merely cleans them to a spick-and-span state. This confronted with the subject of this despondency, any proactive skill 
spell is often used to launder clothes. The caster can cleanse an arca attempts made by the afflicted character related to the source are 
equal to POW in square metres. one grade harder. However a direct assault from the subject instantly 

breaks the spell. 

CooLl Thus a character could be given a demoralising dread of heights, 
ensuring that any Athletic skill used for climbing or Acrobatics skill 

Concentration, Touch 
for balancing would be one difficulty grade harder. 

Cool protects the recipient from the effects of muggy atmospheres 
and heat prostration, guarding them from any Fatigue caused by 
the natural environment. The spell does not stop the effects of heat DIiSshHEeVvEeLl 
related magic, but will make any resistance roll one difficulty grade Instant, Touch 
casier. Someone under the effects of this spell wearing full hoplite Dishevel is the reverse of the Cleanse spell. Objects affected are 
armour could march through a tropical rain forest during the height immediately covered in grime, dust, cobwebs, and so forth. The 
of summer without harm. Cool affects a target of SIZ up to the spell can be used to make brand new objects look old and weath- 
caster’s POW x2. ered or help prevent normally well turned out people from being 

recognised. The caster can dishevel an area equal to POW in square 

COoOoRrDdIiNnAaTtIioOnN metres. 

Touch, Trigger 
Coordination enhances manual dexterity and agility when per- DIiSsrRuUPpTtIioOnN 

forming a single task. When cast in preparation it permits the recip- Instant, Ranged, Resist (Endurance) 
ient a chance to re-roll a single skill check where coordination is Disruption is used for damaging or dissembling physical objects 
required, such as Acrobatics, Lockpicking and so on. The recipient without the need for tools. It is commonly employed to drive off or 
may choose the better of the two rolls, but the spell is expended in kill living creatures, such as birds or vermin. When successfully cast, 
the process. Disruption inflicts 1d3 damage to a single random Hit Location or 

the overall Hit Points of an object. In both cases the damage ignores 

CUuRrSsEe any armour or natural protection. 

Special Duration 
Curse must be cast in combination with a second spell of a Drry 

harmful nature. Its one and only effect is to increase the duration of Instant, Touch 
the accompanying spell so that it is continuous. This comes at a cost Dry removes all extraneous moisture from an object or person, 
however, since the Magic Point used to cast the curse does not return either slicking off to form a puddle or evaporating in a cloud of 
until the caster drops the curse willingly, the curse is dispelled, or the vapour. It is normally used to dry off after heavy rain or help protect 
spell to which it is bound breaks naturally. Curse is commonly com- equipment from rotting, but has a number of other versatile uses. 
bined with spells such as Befuddle, Demoralise, Dullblade, Repug- The caster can dry an object up to POW x2 in SIZ. 
nance, and so on. 

DUuLlLlBbLlaAdDEe 
DAaRrKkNnEeSsSs Ranged 

Concentration, Ranged Dullblade is the reverse of Bladesharp reducing the keenness of 
Darkness creates an area of shadow, equal to POW in square weapons and tools. It reduces the damage inflicted by the weapon by 

metres, which suppresses all light within it. This is enough volume one step, and can never keep a sharp edge. 
to fill a modest room, a length of corridor or form a small cloud if 
cast outside. All non-magical light, including sunlight, passing into EXxTtIinNgGUuIisShH 
or present within the boundary is reduced to the equivalent of a 

Instant, Ranged 
dim glow. 

Extinguish immediately quenches flames and small fires of mod- 
est size and heat. It is useful for dousing candles, lanterns, torches or 

DEeFfLlEeCcTt small cook fires, but it will not work on magical or larger, more fero- 
Touch cious conflagrations such as pyres, burning houses or dragon flames. 
Deflect wards the recipient against tiny impacts of foreign mate- 

rial, such as rain drops, a cloud of midges or even flying grains of 
sand. The protection is limited to individual objects smaller than a 
child’s fingernail, and thus cannot prevent normal missile weapons 
from striking a character. 

125



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc 

FaANnAaTtIicCIisSmM flammable materials alight if held to them for several rounds (see 
Fire on page 79). Wooden hafted weapons under the effects of Fire- 

Ranged, Resist (Willpower) 
blade will be consumed as part of the spell. 

Fanaticism is the reverse of Demoralise. It grants the target a 
wildly excessive or irrational devotion, dedication, or enthusiasm for 
a particular person, species, situation or object. Its effect is to grant FRrOoSsTtBbIiTtEe 
the recipient a temporary Passion equal to the Folk Magic skill of Ranged, Resist (Endurance) 

the caster. Fanaticism can be used to counter Demoralise, and vice Trostbite works directly on living, organic tissue, inflicting numb- 

versa. ness and pain in one of the recipient’s extremities, for example fin- 
gers, toes, buttocks, nose & ears, and so on. The caster must either 

FinndD (XX ) touch a specific extremity or roll randomly if cast at range. If the 
spell is not resisted the area affected suffers sensory numbness fol- 

Concentration, Ranged, Resist (Special) 
lowed by lingering pain for the duration, making skill tests utilis- 

Find has many variations, always specific, and learned as sep- 
ing that location one difficulty grade harder. Frostbite does not deal 

arate spells. Some common examples are given below. It works by 
direct damage but makes the affected area of limited use for a while. 

attuning to the natural emanations of a creature or thing, alerting 
Tor instance, a victim suffering frostbite to the buttocks cannot sit 

the caster to its presence within the spell’s range. Find can be blocked 
without extreme discomfort. 

by dense or thick materials such as metal, or earth and stone at least 
one metre thick. The spell cannot discern emotions or thoughts. 

Find Arrows: Locates ammunition shot by hunters, which miss GLlaAmMOoUuRr 
their target. Concentration, Ranged, Resist (Wallpower) 

Find Flaw: Identifies any flaws in an object, such as hidden imper- Glamour makes the target alluring so that people are naturally 

fections or physical damage. attracted to them. The particular nature of the glamour must be 

Find Luvestock:  Locates a particular type of animal. Can be chosen when cast, and can be anything from increased natural 

resisted with Willpower. beauty, a softer more sultry voice or even a seductively perfumed 

Find Loot: Locates precious metals and gems. body scent. Whilst the spell grants no mechanical benefits, it does 

Find Object: Locates a lost personal possession. ensure that the recipient will gain a chance to gather themselves an 

Find Sickness: ldentifies the existence of disease and illness, audience, engage the attention of someone they wish to make con- 

whether magical or mundane. tact with, or provide a distraction enabling accomplices an opportu- 
nity to perform nefarious deeds. 

FiIrReEaArRrRoOwW 
Touch GLluEe 
Firearrow causes all missiles thrown or fired by the recipient to Touch 

burst into flame when released. Ostensibly created to act as a signal Glue cements together two solid, inanimate objects for the dura- 

flare, it has since evolved into a combat magic. Missiles under its tion of the spell, for example a cart wheel to its axle or a door to 

effect add an additional 1d3 damage, but are extinguished if they its frame. Whilst under the effects of the spell the items, no matter 

impale flesh. Those that strike flammable material have how disparate, cannot be parted unless something actively tries 

a chance equal to the caster’s Folk Magic skill of to wrench them apart. In this circumstance the spell has 

setting alight whatever they lodge in, such as a Brawn skill equal to five times the caster’s POW, 

wooden shields, thatched roofs, and so and fails when a superior Brawn is set against 

on. Wooden ammunition is consumed it, defeating it in an opposed roll. Once 

as part of the spell. the spell concludes or fails the items part 
completely unharmed. 

FIirReEbBlLaAdDEe 
Touch HEeAaLl 
Fireblade is similar to Fire- Instant, Touch 

arrow but is instead cast on Heal has several different 

hand tools and melee weap- effects depending on the nature 

ons. The original purpose of of the ailment it is being used on. 

the spell is to sterilise surgical If the subject is suffering from a 

equipment, aid in slash and minor complaint such as a head- 

burn agriculture or provide ache, back pain, hangover, cold, 

illumination during darkness warts, and so on, then the symp- 

without the need to carry toms are immediately lifted. Cast 

an additional light source. If on a location suffering a Minor 

cast on a weapon it inflicts Wound it restores all lost Hit 

an additional 1d3 damage, Points instantly. Against Serious or 

and has the chance of setting Major Wounds no Hit Points are 
recovered. However the spell will 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FOoolLkK MAaGgIiCc 

stabilise locations, stop all bleeding, and prevent imminent death directly against a Darkness spell to counter it. In this case both spells 
from inattention. are consumed, leaving the ambient light to illuminate the area. 

HEeaAtT Lock 
Instant, Touch Special Duration, Touch 

Heat dramatically increases the temperature of small objects Lock magically secures any device that already has a mechanical 
(with an ENC no larger than a third of the caster’s POW) up to the bar or lock present. A Locked device can be opened only by the 
temperature of boiling water. This versatile spell is useful for mulling caster, and cannot be picked by mundane means (such as by a thief 
wine, cooking food without a fire, or warming a bed prior to sleep. using lock-picks) since the magic renders the mechanism immobile; 
It does not affect living tissue although it can affect clothing and however it could still be forced open by breaking the object the lock 
armour, heating it to uncomfortable levels. is set into. The magic remains in place until opened by the caster, 

after which the device must be subject to a further casting of Lock 

IgGnNIitTEe to restore the enchantment. The Magic Point used to cast Lock does 
not recover until the spell is dismissed or concludes naturally. 

Instant, Ranged 

Ignite only works on flammable inorganic matter, causing a small 
object or hand-sized area to burst into flame. Depending on what MAaGgNnIiFfYy 
was set alight, once burning, the flames may then spread unless Concentration 
quenched or countered in some way. This spell is normally used Magnify allows the caster to see something twice as close as it 
to light candles, torches or lanterns from afar. It can also be used really is. Useful for close work as well as out in the field. 
to start a camp or cooking fire in adverse conditions, such as using 
damp kindling or in strong winds. MiiGgHhTt 

Touch 
InNcCoOGgNnIitToO Might permits the recipient to engage in impressive acts of phys- 

Resist (Endurance), Touch, Trigger ical brawn. It adds the caster’s POW to the recipient’s STR, but 
Incognito alters the facial features of the recipient to a bland, only for the purposes of lifting, breaking, and contests of strength 

unmemorable countenance. It does not affect the voice, manner- as defined under the Brawn skill. It does not increase the character’s 
isms or physical size /presence of the recipient, but ensures that visu- Damage Modifier when inflicting combat damage. 
ally they do not stand out from the crowd.Anyone under the effects 
of Incognito is actively ignored by those who might otherwise be Miimiic 
searching for him; he is simply overlooked and discounted. 

Touch, Trigger 
Mimic allows the recipient to perfectly mimic the voice and man- 

IrRoOnNhHaAnNdD nerisms of someone the caster has seen and heard personally. It does 
Touch not affect their physical appearance. 
Ironhand allows the recipient to hold anything that would oth- 

erwise cause damage (such as extremely hot or cold items, or those MIiNnDdSsPpEeEecChH 
dripping acid) without causing themselves injury. Thus a user could 

Concentration, Ranged, Resist (Wallpower) 
grasp a brand from a fire, lift a bubbling cauldron from a spit or 

Mindspeech allows telepathy between the caster and a target, 
even reach through a steam vent to grab an object on the other side. 

enabling verbal intercourse without needing to speak aloud. The 
It does not grant total immunity from damage, merely stops it from 

caster and target must share the same language, or else the spell 
conducting through the skin of the recipient’s hands. The spell does 

will merely transmit unintelligible gobbledegook. Attempting to cast 
not protect anything worn on the hand, so rings, gloves, and such 

Mindspeech on somebody beyond range automatically fails. 
like will suffer the effects of the source. 

KNnOoCcKk Moosibuilrity 
Touch 

Instant, Touch 
Mobility increases the Movement rate of the recipient by 1d3 

Knock magically unfastens any device that is currently secured 
metres for the spell’s duration. It is often used by hunters, herders, 

with a mechanical bar or lock. It does not work on magically locked 
and those secking to escape pursuit. 

objects, only mundane ones. The spell only affects a single fastening, 
so if there are several locks and bars securing the object, the spell 
will need to be recast for each one. PaAtThHwWAaYy 

Touch 

LiIgGhHTt Pathway enables the recipient to more easily travel through 
heavy vegetation, safe from being scratched, snagged or otherwise 

Concentration, Ranged 
hindered. Under its enchantment Movement rates are not reduced 

Light must be cast on an inanimate object (this could be a branch, 
in woods, jungles, swamps, and similar overgrown terrain. 

sword blade, spear point, torch, and so on). It produces enough light 
to illuminate an area as though with a lantern. It can also be cast 

127



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc 

PEerRfFuUmMEe The spell only protects against physical damage so won’t help 
against events such as fire, choking, and so on. 

Concentration, Ranged, Resist (Willpower) 

Perfume either negates a noxious odour or imbibes an odourless 
substance with a pleasing fragrance. The spell does not affect the REePpAaIirR 
properties of the source of a stench (so a rotting carcass is still rotten) Instant, Touch 

- it merely makes its presence tolerable. Repair fixes physical damage to an inanimate object. Each sepa- 
rate successful casting repairs 1d3 Hit Points of damage. 

PEeTt 
Concentration, Resist (Willpower), Touch REepPuUgGNnAaNnCcEe 
Pet allows the caster to take mental control of a small creature, Concentration, Ranged, Resist (Waillpower) 

sending it off to scout, fetch or perform some other complex task. It Repugnance twists the appearance of the target so that they 

can be cast on any creature neither of whose SIZ and INT charac- cause distaste in all those that see, hear or smell them. The partic- 

teristics may exceed half the caster’s CHA. If the targeted creature ular effect must be chosen when cast, and can be anything from a 

is the already the loyal pet of the caster it does not need to resist the great wart on the end of a nose, a high pitched nasal voice or even 

spell. pungent body odour. Whatever is chosen, it will cause people to turn 
away from the victim or make excuses so as to leave their presence 

PHhAaNnTtaAsSmM as quickly as possible. 

Concentration, Ranged 
Phantasm allows the caster to weave together insubstantial or ShHoOCcKk 

near weightless objects so that they take a shape or ghostly form. Instant, Ranged, Resist (Evade) 

Thus a spectral figure could be woven from a naturally occurring Shock produces a mild electrical discharge which may be directed 

mist, or a face formed in a pile of dead leaves. Beyond this the spell at living things. The caster must either touch a specific extremity or 

has little effect, save to frighten, intrigue or disconcert those that roll randomly if cast at range. If the spell is not resisted, the shocked 

view it. location is stunned for 1d3 Turns; armour does not protect. The 
spell makes a loud crack when cast. 

PIieErRcCEe 
Touch ShHOoVvEe 
Pierce can be cast on any item with a point, helping it to pene- Instant, Ranged, Resist (Special) 

trate thick surfaces. It is normally used to help sew leather, punch Shove allows the caster to telekinetically move an object by giv- 

holes in metal or hammer pitons into stone. Any weapon or tool ing it a single crude push. The item is not moved with enough force 

enhanced with this spell ignores the first two Armour Points of the to inflict damage, and is still subject to gravity. The spell affects an 

person, creature or object struck. amount of ENC or SIZ equal to the caster’s POW. Living targets 
can resist with either Endurance or Evade. 

PoLliishH 
Instant, Touch SLlEeEePp 
Polish instantly buffs an object of ENC or SIZ of up to the cast- Resist (Endurance), Touch 

er’s POW to a high sheen making it glossy, shiny, and highly desir- Sleep sends its recipient into a deep, peaceful sleep. It has no 

able even if the quality of the article is sub-par. effect on creatures with a SIZ greater than the caster’s POW. Unless 
the target resists, it slumbers for a number of hours equal to the half 

PRrEeSsEerRvVEe the caster’s POW. However the spell takes 1d3 Rounds to take effect 
before the target falls unconscious. Any attempt to cast this spell in a 

Instant, Touch 
combat situation automatically fails. 

Preserve prevents organic matter, both vegetable and animal, 
from bacterial decay and putrefaction for 1d3 months, by sterilising 
it. If the material is later smoked, pickled or salted it is preserved SlLooww 
indefinitely. The spell can halt decay that has begun, but not reverse Ranged, Resist (Endurance) 

it. The caster can affect an amount of organic matter with SIZ or Slow is the direct opposite of Mobility, slowing Movement Rate 

ENC equal to their POW. by 1d3+3 metres, if the target fails to resist. 

PRrOoTtEeCcTtIioOnN SpPeEeEdDaARrTt 
Touch Instant, Touch, Trigger 

Protection is useful in a wide range of tasks where there is a risk Speedart boosts the velocity of thrown or fired missiles so that 

of accidental injury such as working in a foundry or mine. The first they travel farther before losing efficacy. The spell increases the 

time the character would normally take damage that penetrates effective range by 1.5 times the weapon’s normal distance. 

protective clothing or armour, the Protection spell will trigger, and 
reduce the damage taken by 1d3 points. The spell then dissipates. 

128



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FOoolLkK MAaGgIiCc 

SPpIirRIitTsShHIieElLdD CRrEeAaTtIinNgG NEewW FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc SPpEeLlLlSs 
Concentration, Resist (Willpower), Touch There are doubtless many spells Games Masters may want to introduce that are 

This spell creates a shield around the recipient which deters spir- not covered by those provided in this chapter. If inventing new cantrips, some points to 

its from entering. Any spirit wishing to attack or possess the recipient bear in mind to keep Folk Magic reasonably balanced are: 

must overcome the spell by winning an opposed test of their Will- 
&K As noted, Folk Magic spells are limited in their effects. Avoid introducing 

power against the caster’s Folk Magic skill. 
spells that have multiple or far-reaching effects. 

&K Spells are utility-based: that is, to aid a mundane task in some way. Try to 

TidDyY create spells that remain focused on aiding daily life rather than being whole- 

Instant, Ranged sale_forces for destruction. 

Tidy immediately restores a number of items (up to the caster’s & Note that Folk Magic spells do not, by and large, provide skill bonuses or 

POW) within the spell’s range to a neat, tidy, and orderly fashion. penalties. Those that affect living things do so in subtle or limited ways. 

Items larger than 3 ENC are shifted to a more orderly position but K One does not need to create spells that have a measurable game mechanics 

will require manual intervention to tidy properly. effect. Folk Magic spells can provide background colows; flavous; and atmo- 

sphere. Clever magicians will find creative uses for them. 

TIirReE N s 
Ranged, Resist (Endurance) 
Tire inflicts one level of Fatigue on the subject unless resisted. VoIiCcEe 

Concentration, Ranged, Resist (Wallpower) 
TRrAaNnSsLlAaTtEe Voice amplifies the recipient’s intonation and delivery so that it 

Concentration, Resist (Willpower), Touch becomes compelling when issuing verbal commands. All who can 
Translate permits the caster to understand any language spoken hear the speaker are forced to listen. Their vocalisation also car- 

to him, by setting up a psychic link with the target. The translation ries across and through even the loudest background noise (howling 
provided is often imperfect, as complex terms or concepts cannot be gales, the roar of a waterfall, the clash of arms on a battlefield) up to 
comprehended, but it does allow simple communication. The spell arange of ten times the recipient’s CHA in metres. 
works between sapient creatures with a definite, constructed lan- 
guage, and still relies on being able to see, hear or otherwise perceive WAaRrMmTtHh 
the target as in normal conversation. If cast upon a creature of ani- 

Concentration, Touch 
mal awareness, communication is restricted to the simple reception 

Warmth protects the recipient from the effects of freezing atmo- 
of emotional state. 

spheres and exposure, and from Fatigue caused by the natural envi- 
ronment. The spell does not stop the effects of cold-related magic 

TuUNnEe cast at them, but will make any resistance roll one difficulty grade 
Instant, Touch easier. Thus a person under the effects of this spell could walk about 
Tune ensures that the musical instrument touched is in perfect on a glacier during midwinter in their underclothes without harm. 

pitch no matter the dampness, temperature or its general condition, Warmth affects an object of SIZ up to the caster’s POW x2. 
ensuring that the following performance is unaffected. 

WAiTtCcHhSsIigGhHTt 
VEeNnTtRrIilLoOqQUuIisSmM Ranged, Resist (Waillpower) 

Concentration, Ranged, Resist (Willpower) Witchsight allows the caster to see active magic, enchanted items, 
Ventriloquism allows the caster to project their voice anywhere and invisible entities (although such things are simply shadowy 

within range. The caster needs only to think the projected words, representations) that lie within range and line of sight. It can also 
not actually to speak them physically, which can disconcert those penetrate illusions or discern the true guise of shapeshifted crea- 
unaware of what is going on. If cast upon a living creature, the tures. Beings which wish to remain hidden or disguised must win an 
caster can take control of their vocal cords, and speak through them opposed test of their Willpower versus the casting roll. 
instead. 

VIigGoOuURr 
Touch 
Vigour makes the recipient feel alive and energetic, being used 

to offset the effects of strenuous physical labour. For the spell’s dura- 
tion, all Fatigue effects gained from laborious activity are ignored 
(but return on the spell’s dismissal). It negates the effects of a Tire 
spell. 

129



