Mythras:  Game System

. — 
o X s oM Kk oo >z 

Yy m KW S I& KB 3 B« i T X W 

Game System

pa— — 
o X s oM Kk oo j< 

Yy m KW S I K KB 3 B« v T X W 

any different things can occur during a MYTHRAS game. 
Some are resolved through skill use or one of the major ACcIidD 

M game mechanics such as combat or magic; others Acids come from many different sources and are used extensively 
require their own rules for adjudication. This chapter provides rules in alchemical research. The most important factor with any acid is 
and guidance for a variety of different scenarios that Games Masters its concentration, rather than its type. All acids are therefore classi- 
and players will encounter whilst playing the game. fied as either Weak, Strong or Concentrated. MYTHRAS assumes that 

The listis not exhaustive but should represent most common situ- contact with the acid is significant or sustained, rather than just a 
ations. If Games Masters find there are other situations that require droplet or two. 
some form of game-system adjudication, and that these situations A splash or spray of acid lasts only for a few Combat Rounds 
seem to occur frequently, then they are encouraged to develop their before it loses potency. Immersion in a considerable volume of 
own rules to cover these special circumstances, using those given in acid inflicts the damage every round until the victim or location is 
this chapter as a basis for replication or development. removed and treated. 

For generic acids it is assumed that armour protects against the 
Briefly this chapter includes rules for: effects of acid but does not stop it, its Armour Points being reduced 

by the acid’s damage until it reaches zero hit points, at which point 
& Acid 

the damage is then transferred to the hit location it protected. 
& Action, Time, and Movement 

Armour reduced to zero Armour Points is considered useless as the 
« Ageing 

acid burns through bindings, straps and joints. 
« Asphyxiation, Drowning, and Suffocation 

Although the Acid table assumes the action of acid on living 
4« Blood Loss 

flesh, not all acids affect non-organic substances equally. Some can 
& Character Improvement 

cat rapidly through metal, whilst others barely mark it. If desired it 
4« Disease and Poison 

is entirely permissible to have strange acids which affect only metal 
& Encumbrance 

or other specific materials instead of flesh. 
& Falling 
« Fatigue AcciidD TAaBbLlEe 
« Fires 

Acid Type Damage Duration 
« Healing from Injury 

Weak 1d2 1 Combat Round 
<« Inanimate Objects 

Strong 1d4 1d2 Combat Rounds 
& Luck Points 

Concentrated 1d6 1d3 Combat Rounds 
&« Passions 

& Survival 
X M 

« Visibility 
« Weather 

63



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

STtRrAaTtEeGgIicC TIimMEe TRrAaVvEeLl TAaBbLlEe 
ACcTtIiOoNn,, TIimMEe aAnNDd Distance Covered (kilometres) per 

Travel Example Day (10-12 hours) 

MOoVvEeMmEeNnTt 
Walking 30 per Day 

How quickly time passes in MYTHRAS depends on circumstances. 
Horseback at casual speed 60 per Day 

Activities in roleplaying games rarely elapse in real time unless char- 
Wagon at casual speed 15 per Day 

acters are conversing with each other or with non-player charac- 
ters. For the most part, timescales for different forms of activity are Open Sea, favourable conditions 150-300 (in a 24 hour period) 

inflated or condensed depending on what is being done. Open Sea, unfavourable 0-60 (in a 24 hour period) 

The key timescales and what actions and motion can be accom- conditions 

plished within them, are as follows: Combat Rounds, Local Time Coast or River, favourable 30-60 per Day 

and Strategic Time. conditions 

Coast or River, unfavourable 0-30 per Day 

CommMB conditions 
bAaTt ROoUuNnDdSs 

A Combat Round, dealt with more fully in the Combat chapter, 
represents five seconds of real time. Combat Rounds are used to 

increase the distance covered, along with dealing with any hazards 
measure short, frenetic bursts of activity that take seconds to com- 

that might need to be resolved in Combat Rounds or Local Time. 
plete. They can be useful for measuring very detailed activities that 
require a blow-by-blow resolution. For example, a chase between 
hunter and prey can be measured in Combat Rounds, represent- MOoVvEeMmEeNnTt 
ing the twists and turns that happen very quickly during any tense Movement is broken down into three ‘gaits’ which are Walking, 
pursuit. Running and Sprinting 

Walking is the average speed a member of a particular spe- 

LocAaLl TIimMEe cies ambles along at when in no particular hurry. This is normally 
referred to as a creature’s base Movement Rate. 

Local Time represents a few minutes to a few hours, and is used 
Running is a trot or jog, at a speed which can be maintained 

to measure activities that do not require the detailed attention of a 
over long periods. Basically, anything faster than a walk. Maximum 

Combat Round, but require a specific concentration of effort with a 
running speed is triple Movement Rate, which may vary according 

definite end result. Picking a lock might take five minutes, and this is 
to the bonus granted by Athletics skill. 

a measure of Local Time. Observing the patrols made by teams of 
Sprinting is flat out movement at top speed, which can only 

guards around a castle’s walls might require several hours, but is still 
be maintained for brief periods. Peak sprinting speed is five times 

a measure of Local Time. Manage Local Time in the following way: 
Movement Rate, which again may be increased according to what- 

1. The character states his intention (Local Time starts) 
ever bonus is granted from Athletics skill. 

2. The Games Master decides how long this takes to 
The Comparative Movement table summarises the typical walk- 

accomplish 
ing distances covered by creatures of differing base movement rates, 

3. Any appropriate skill rolls are made and the results noted 
for a variety of time periods. Tactical movement during combat is 

4. The Games Master communicates the results, and the time 
explained in more detail on page 101 (Engagement). 

taken in step 2 passes (Local Time ends) 

Local Time may then continue, move into Combat Rounds or 
become Strategic Time SCcEeNnEeSs 

Scenes are an abstract time measurement based on definable events or 
wnteractions. They can lastfor Combat Rounds, Local or Strategic Time, 

STtRrAaTtEeGgIicC TIimMEe 
and duration is based on activities being engaged in by one or more charac- 

Strategic Time is measured in days, months or even years. Use 
ters. Some spells, for instance, lastfor a Scene, which means that duration 

Strategic Time for those occasions where it is not necessary to know 
us variable but based on that Scene’s need. For example, if a Folk Magic 

the detail, simply the outcome — “You ride for ten days and reach the 
spell, such as Bladesharp, is cast successfully, it will last for one active 

city by dawn on the eleventh day.’ ‘After a whole day of watching the 
scene. This will be either as short as the duration of an entire combat, or 

guard patrols you now understand their movements and patterns.’ 
as long as a Local Tume event where Bladesharp might be required. Scenes 

‘It takes a week to craft the sword.” 
always have actwe player participation. For instance an evening spent in a 

Strategic Time is mostly concerned with how far characters 
lavern gaining information is a Scene, because it requares the characters to 

travel depending on the mode of transport used. The Strategic 
participate. However a long-dustance trip by sea, where the Games Master 

Time Travel Table offers examples for various conditions. The travel 
stipulates that several days pass without incident, is not a Scene. 

times assume a travelling day of around 10 to 12 hours with regular 
The Games Master always determines when a Scene starts and ends. 

stops for rest, water and food. 
For the most part it will be obvious and important only where magical 

If characters need to increase the distances given in the Strategic effects need to be measured. 
Time Travel Table, then they can effectively add half again to the 
distance travelled in the Strategic Time period but gain an enduring N\ 4 
level of Fatigue as a result. Naturally an appropriate skill roll (Drive, 
Ride, Athletics, and so on) also needs to be made to successfully 

69



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

COoMmPpAaRrAaTtIiVvEe MOoVvEeMmEeNnTt TAaBbLlEe 

Time Period Movement 4m Movement bm Movement 8m Movement 10m Movement 12m Movement 14m 

Combat Round 4m 6m 10m 12m 14m 

Minute 48m 72m 120m 144m 168m 

Hour 2.9km 4.3km 5.8km 7.2km 8.6km 10.1km 

MOoVvIiNnGg InN ARrMmOoUuRr attempts to swim in his armour (Swim speed of 6+4, divided 

Worn armour acts against character Movement Rates, and cer- by two, then subtract 6 equals -1). 

tain kinds of actions such as swimming or climbing. The armour’s & Climbing rough surface (branching trees, ladders, scaffolds, 

Initiative Penalty is applied to Movement of different kinds in the and so on): Half the Armour Penalty (rounded up) is sub- 

following ways: tracted from the base Movement Rate. If the result is zero or 
less, they are too burdened by their armour to climb. Thus, 

& Walking: Armour does not interfere with walking movement, our hero in his Hoplite Plate armour can still scale easily 
although it can increase the Fatigue level (see page 78) climbable objects, as his Climbing movement is 6 — 3 = 3. 

& Running or Sprinting: Subtract the Armour Penalty from the & Climbing a steep surface (pitched roofs, steep hills, and so on): 
running and sprinting speed. The result is how fast the char- The Armour Penalty is subtracted from the base Movement 
acter can move during chases or when charging. For example, Rate. If the result is zero or less, they are too burdened by 
a character wearing a full panoply of Hoplite Plate armour their armour to climb. Thus, our hero in his Hoplite Plate 
would reduce both gaits by 6m. cannot climb as his Climbing movementis 6 —6 = 0. 

& Swimming: Take the character’s swimming speed (see the & Climbing a sheer surface (walls, cliff faces, etc): Double the 
Swim skill page 43) divide by two (rounding up), and sub- Armour Penalty is subtracted from the base Movement Rate. 
tract the Armour Penalty. If the result is zero, the character As with climbing a rough surface, if the result is zero or less, 
cannot move, and barely keeps himself afloat. If the result is the character cannot climb. 
negative, then the character sinks. For example, even if our & Jumping: Reduce the distance in metres the character can 
character was a top class swimmer (84%), wearing full Hop- jump (see the Athletics skill, page 38) by half the Armour 
lite Plate with its -6 penalty, would still cause him to sink if he Penalty (rounded up). For standing jumps this impairment is 

halved. 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Anathaym, like all humans, has a base Movement Rate of 6. In addition 

she is a proficient athlete with an Athletics skill of 52%. From these her 
maximum movement rates are calculated as: 

Walking 6m — base Movement Rate of a human. 

Running 2 1m — Base Movement Rate plus one for her Athletics skill, mul- 
tiplied by three. 

Sprinting 40m — Base Movement Rate plus two for her Athletics skall, mul- 
tiplied by fuve. 

AGgEeIinNgG 
All characters age, and with age come certain consequences. The 

signs of ageing start at Early Middle Age (40 years for humans — 
other species might age at greater or lesser rates). As a character 
passes into a new Ageing Band he must make both an Endurance 
roll and a Willpower roll at the grades noted. If a roll is failed then 
he experiences Ageing Effects as shown in the Ageing Effects table. 

Each characteristic affected by ageing reduces by 1d3 points. 
These points can be recovered or at least partially counteracted 
through characteristic improvement, representing efforts made 
to keep themselves trim and alert as they grow older. If any 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

characteristic is reduced to zero from ageing, the character dies due Depending on the method of asphyxiation, the Games Master 
to his terminal frailty. may wish to prevent full recovery, imposing an enduring level of 

What specific debilitating effects arise as part of the ageing pro- Fatigue to represent damage to the lungs caused by smoke or water 
cess are up to the Games Master to define. lor instance, reducing inhalation. 
STR, CON or DEX represents general wear and tear on the body, 
with creaking joints, and a gradual loss of mobility. Reducing INT 
indicates that age is starting to play tricks on the mind and memory, 
whilst reducing CHA indicates the character is getting craggier, and BLloodD Losss 
more short-tempered perhaps, as they get older. Blood loss due to external and internal wounds, usually sustained 

in combat, can wear a character down very quickly. Its effects are 
measured by the accumulation of Fatigue levels, in a manner similar 

AGgEe BAaNnDds 
to asphyxiation since blood is needed to oxygenate the body’s mus- 

Age Band gr:;igzance and Willpower Roll 
cles and vital organs. Significant blood loss is suffered in the follow- 
ing circumstances: 

Early Middle Age (40-49 for humans) Easy 
Middle Age (50-59 for humans) Standard & The Bleed Special Effect (see page 96) 

Late Middle Age (60-69 for humans) Hard & Injury resulting in a Major Wound (see page 110) 

Old Age (70-79 for humans) Formidable & Diseases and Poisons that result in Bleeding (see page 75) 

Advanced Old Age (80-89 for humans) Herculean Unrestrained blood loss typically results in death unless some 
Dotage (90+ for humans) Hopeless form of medical attention or healing magic can be applied to con- 

trol the bleeding. 
Unlike asphyxiation, the effects of serious blood loss on Fatigue 

are enduring. A character recovers Fatigue lost to bleeding at a rate 
of one level per day, starting the day after his exsanguinations cease. 

AGgEeIinNGg EFfFfEeCcTtSs TAaBbLlEe 
1d6 Physical Ageing (Failed = Mental Ageing (Failed 

Endurance) Willpower) CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr 
1-2 STR INT 

34 CON POW ImMpPrRoOvVeEmMEenNTt 
56 DEX CHA Every MYTHRAS character has the opportunity to improve with 

time. Improvement can be undertaken in several areas: 

& Increasing existing skills 
& Increasing characteristics 

ASsPpHhYyXxIiAaTtIiOoNn,, & Increasing passions 
& Learning new skills 

DRrOoWwNnIiNnGg AanNDd & Learning new magical abilities and spells 

SuUFfFfoOCcAaTtIioOnN 
Characters can hold their breath for a number of seconds equal EXxPpEeRrIieEnNcCEe ROoLlLlSs 

to their Endurance skill. However the character must be prepared The mechanism for most character improvement is the Experi- 

(filling the lungs with as much air as possible); if not, then the period ence Roll. Games Masters dispense Experience Rolls at an appropri- 

is halved if the character was in a passive situation, or reduced to ate juncture in the campaign: at the end of every successful scenario 

one fifth if the character was engaged in strenuous activity. or storyline; or after perhaps two or three sessions of play if the 

Once the period of held breath is over, characters must make an story is a long one which will take time to complete. The frequency 

Endurance roll: is at the Games Master’s discretion. A high frequency of Experience 
Rolls will lead to the characters developing at a faster rate. 

& 1If the roll is a critical success, no further deterioration occurs. There is no right or wrong time to give Experience Rolls, but 
& If the roll is successful, the character accrues an extra level natural breaks in the story may suggest suitable times. The Games 

of Fatigue. Master is, however, always the decision maker here. Whilst players 
& If the roll fails, the character sustains 1d2 extra levels of cannot demand Experience Rolls, they have a right to expect them 

Fatigue that round. at certain times — as their characters will not be able to develop with- 
& If the roll is fumbled, the character sustaing 1d3 extra levels out them. 

of Fatigue that round. 
How MAaNnYy?? 

Without aid, death from asphyxiation is usually swift. If the 
The number of Experience Rolls given in any one sitting should 

asphyxiation ends before the character dies, they recover Fatigue be between two and four, but it can be lower or higher depending 
levels lost to suffocation relatively quickly; regaining one level per 
minute. 

71



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

on how long it has been since the last set of rolls, and how well the a character undergoes following a disastrous failure. Multiple 
characters performed or have been played. fumbles of the same skill do not stack. 

It is recommended that all characters be given the same num- 
Games Masters can, if they wish, increase the dice step if they 

ber of Experience Rolls, which helps maintain fairness and parity 
want to have skill progression move at a faster rate without giving 

in character progression — although even with the same number of 
Experience Rolls on a frequent basis: so, instead of increasing by 

rolls characters may progress at different rates, as the mechanics for 
1d4+1 skills increase by 1d6+1. If adjusting the default dice roll in 

Experience Rolls illustrate. 
this way, Games Masters should set the expectation at the start of 

The only exception to this guideline is where a character gains 
the campaign and not veer from it. 

an additional roll (or suffers a reduction in rolls) for their Experi- 
ence Modifier as described on page 9. This modifier should only be 
permitted in situations where the character can put their influence InNcCrREeaASsIinNgG CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCcSs 
to good use or suffer its consequences, such as returning home at A creature’s rolled characteristics are regarded as its peak nat- 
the conclusion of a scenario. Thus it is not intended that the bonus ural development, a combination of its birth and environment as 
should be applied at the end of each and every session, especially it was growing. Thus just as some horses are bigger, stronger and 
when the characters are isolated or exploring off in the wilderness. tougher than others, humans and other sapient species can grow up 

Experience Rolls do not need to be used there and then. They to exhibit fairly diverse physical and mental characteristics. 
can be reserved for future use at the player’s discretion. The main Characteristics can, like skills, be improved through Experience 
reasons for reserving use of a roll are: Rolls, which represent training regimes. However, such increases are 

artificial boosts which normally atrophy after the training exercises 
& To increase Characteristics 

cease, characteristics dropping back to their natural levels whether 
& To buy new Professional Skills 

the workouts were daily calisthenics sessions to increase CON or 
& To put towards developing a new magical Tradition (explained 

memory tests to enhance INT. 
in the Introduction to Magic chapter). 

To achieve and maintain characteristic increases requires that a 
character reduce his regular allotment of Experience Rolls by one or 
more points. This represents the continual and intensive effort spent 

InNcCrREeaASsIinNgG EXxIisStTiInNgG SKkIiLlLlSs 
to push his body beyond its normal capability. 

Any skill on the character sheet, Standard or Professional, can be 
Each Experience Roll sacrificed in this manner boosts the trained 

increased by spending one Experience Roll. 
characteristic by one tenth of its rolled species maximum. Thus a 

& The player rolls 1d100 and compares it to the skill being human who engaged in regular weightlifting to build up his STR 

increased. The character’s INT is added to the roll. could, at the cost of reducing his normal allotment of Experience 

& If the number rolled is equal to or greater than the skill being Rolls by one, gain +2 points to his Strength. A minotaur on the other 

improved it increases by 1d4+1%. hand would gain +3 points to Strength as his species maximum is 

& If the number rolled is less than the skill selected, the skill still 24. 

increases but only by 1%. When a characteristic increases, all attributes and skills derived 

& If a character fumbled any skill during the course of the from it increase too (if the characteristic increase is enough to create 

preceding session(s) — i.c., between the last set of Experience an attribute change). Thus, increasing STR by one point will also 

Rolls and the present one — the fumbled skill gains a free increase each skill that uses it as a component by one point too. In 

increase of 1%. It is a truism that we learn more from our addition Damage Modifier may also increase if the new STR value 

mistakes than our successes, and this represents the reflection moves the character into the next Damage Modifier band. 
No matter how much training is undertaken, no characteristic 

can exceed its species maximum — which is simply the highest pos- 
FRrEeEeLlyY ImMpPrRoOVvIinNgG SKkIiLlLlSs 

Normally players have full discretion over which skills to improve, sible result from the characteristic roll. Once the character decides 

no matler thewr location or circumstances. Sometimes, however; it may be to cease his exercise regime, his trained characteristic drops by one 

unrealistic for a character to practice Lockpicking when he is currently on improvement step the next time he receives Experience Rolls, and 

a ship, and has done nothing butf ight sea monsters for the last few game again the following time, the atrophying continuing until the charac- 

sessions. teristic has returned to its natural value. 

In such cases it 1s reasonable for the Games Masters to request that SIZ is the exception to the above rules. It cannot be increased 

characters only attempt to improve skills which they have recently used, or through mundane means. 

Jor which the situation exists to practice them. For example, if the ship- 
bound character arrives at a civilised port it is quate likely he can find a InNcCrREeaASsIinNgG PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 
local thieves’ guald or locksmath with whom he can practice. As described under Passions on page 82, the value of a passion 

Some caution s required that the Games Master is not too restrictive, may be increased with Experience Rolls in exactly the same way as 
as this can lead to a bias in a subset of those skills which are most oflen a skill. If supported by play, the Games Master might even allow a 
used in his campaign, leading to disproportionate character development. passion to be reduced by the use of an Experience Roll. 
Instead, if a character wishes to improve unusual skills, the Games Mas- Tor example, constant spurning from an unrequited love might 
ter should use thus to create a roleplaying opportunity or an eventual subplot eventually wear down the passion of even the most ardent lover, 
\ Jfor hus campaign. r especially one who wishes to pursue a relationship without the ghosts 

of the past haunting them. 

72



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

TRrAaIinNIinNgG ImMpPrRoOvVeEmMEenNTt TAaBbLlEe 
PEerRmMAaNnEeNnTt CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIicC ImMpPrRoOvVeEmMEenNTt 

Degree of Difference Skill Improves By 
Some players may bemoan the significant and continual costs of 

characteristic improvement. In these cases the Games Master can ignore 21-30% 1d2 

a certain level of realism, and instead focus on_fun, allowing permanent 31-40% 1d3 

characteristic boosts for a one-off Experience Roll cost. 41-50% 1d4 

This method must be treated with a degree of caution howeven; since 51-60% 1d6 

not all Games Masters reward players with the samef requency or number 61-70% 1d6+1 

of Experience Rolls; thus the default costs may be too cheap or expensive. 71-80% 1d6+2 

Additionally games where characteristic improvement 1s too prevalent can 
81-90% 1d6+3 

quickly lead to many characters with identical attributes, each tweaked to 
91-100% 1d6+4 

lake advantage of natural break points within the system. 
Each 10% +1 

Thef ollowing method utilises the current and minimum characteristic 
values so that it scales for all creatures. Although it sometimes throws up 
an oddity between characteristics rolled on different dice, this should be TRrAaIinNEeRrSs 
considered a feature of that particular species. Since most creatures are A trainer is someone who works with the character, helping them 
generated using no more than three or four dice, this method remains both to practice a particular skill hoping, through coaching and mento- 
simple and comparatively fai: ring, to improve the character’s skill. Characters can act as trainers 

Cost to increase a characteristic by one point = 1+creature’s current for other characters but it is usual to seek out someone who, through 
characteristic value, minus the species minimum,_for that characteristic years of specialised study and greater experience, has more benefits 

Thus a human with DEX 12 would need to invest 10 Experience and insight to offer. 
Rolls (15— 3) to raise DEX to 13. A trainer must have at least 20% more than the character in 

the skill being trained, and the degree of improvement rests on the 
N - difference: 

TEeaACcHhEeRrSs 
LeEaArRnNIinNgG NEewW SKkIiLlLlSs A teacher is a professional trainer who possesses the Teach skill, 

Some characters may wish to study new Professional skills which using it to improve the quality of his tuition. They utilise the same 

they never had the chance to learn from their culture or career. Training Chart above, but modify the amount increased according 

Before they can start investing Experience Rolls they must first find to the result of a Teach roll: 

a source of knowledge from which to learn. This could be as pro- 
& Critical Success: Skill improvement increases by two Training 

saic as a professional tutor such those provided by cults or brother- 
steps 

hoods. Alternately it might be a more exotic source of education, an 
& Success: Skill improvement increases by one Training step 

ancient and crumbling training scroll or an ancestor spirit bound to 
& Failure: No effect on improvement 

the community’s sacred stone tiki. 
& Fumble: Skill improvement decreases by one Training step, 

Once a source of education is found, the character must spend 
which may result in the character gaining no improvement 

an entire month of study and practice to garner a basic grounding in 
through the training 

that skill. This costs 3 Experience Rolls plus whatever in-game costs 
are required to pay the teacher (if one exists), and purchase (or rent) 
whatever equipment and tools may be needed. LimiiTts tToO TRrAaIinNIinNgG 

Training comes with some limitations: 

TRrAaIinNIinNgG & Only one skill at a time can be trained. 
Skills can be improved without expending Experience Rolls, & A trained skill must be next improved using an Experience 

through help of a mentor; either a trainer or a teacher. Roll; it cannot benefit from the training procedure again until 
Characters must spend one full week in training to benefit from it has been increased in this way. 

a training increase. At the end of the training period the skill being & Trainers can only tutor a single student at a time, whereas 
trained improves by the die roll indicated on the Training Chart, teachers may educate multiple students at once. As a guide, 
with any modifiers due to the Teaching skill. divide the trainer’s Teaching skill by 10 to determine how 

How much a mentor charges for his services depends very much many students that teacher is prepared to train at one time. 
on the nature of the campaign and the setting. They might accept 
manual labour or favours in return for training, or insist on hard 

Cuurlrts aAnNDd BRrOoTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 
coin. In the case of abstract promises the Games Master must set the 

Cults and guilds may offer training at a reduced cost, or free 
terms and the character should meet them, or else face some form 

of charge, to their members. The training costs outlined earlier are 
of consequence if they are not met. 

therefore considered a standard guide; cult or brotherhood mem- 
In terms of hard coin, a week’s training costs 1 Silver Piece for 

bers may be offered a reduced rate, but this may be dependent on 
every 5% the mentor has in the skill he is training. If he also knows 

rank and standing within the organization. The Games Master may 
how to teach, this amount increases by 1 silver piece for each 10% he 

need to set these limits. 
has in the Teach skill. So, a mentor with 70% in Lore (History) could 
charge 14 SP; or 19 SP if he also had Teach 50%. 

73



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Tired of having sand kicked in herface by Xenos during combat training, 

Anathaym decides that she needs to be as strong as her hated rival, so that she 
can properly humiliate him the next time they face off in the sparring circle. 
With her STR 11, SIZ 10, and no Damage Modifier she is at a significant 
disadvantage, especially when wrestling 

Thus Anathaym throws herself body and soul into a punishing training 
schedule, her player deciding that she’ll use all three of Anathaym’s regularly 
assigned Experience Rolls to increase her STR. She boosts her characteristic 
by +6 but at the expense of consuming all herf ree time (preventing any other 
skall improvements to be made). The Games Master also rules that it takes six 
weeks of campaign time_for her to achweve this new strength. 

When Anathaym next turns up at the combat school, Xenos inevitably 
makes some_foul comment concerning her new ‘manliness’ which she seizes 
upon to challenge hum. The arrogant noble insultingly looks her muscular 
Plysique up and down (STR 17), then offers to arm-wrestle with her. How- 
eve, although her Damage Modifier s now in partty with Xenos® (+1d2) she 
stll loses the match, her rival being slightly more experienced in applying his 
Brawn in these tests of machismo. 

Anathaym rages at her humiliating defeat, but master Samothis approaches 
has student and sardonically suggests that if she spent time actually practicing 
her combat skills instead of turning herself into an ox, she might actually 
simply punch out her opponent the next time. Anathaym hears the wisdom in 
has words and ceases her weightlifling, planning to invest some of her future 
Experience Rolls in becoming more skilful in unarmed combat. 

Following the advice of amotlus, Anathaym seeks out her mentor to be 
schooled in the art of unarmed combat. In her single-mindedness to become 
an expert of the Meerish Infantry combat style, her Unarmed skill has lan- 
guished at a mere 37 %. Master Zamothus on the other hand is an expert with 
85%, and a Teach skill of 79%. 

Afier ten days of intensive training Anathaym benefits greatly from her 
Diisease AanNDd POo1isSoOnN mentor’s wisdom. The difference in skill between them is 48% which on the 

Some of the most feared things which can affect characters are Training Chart table normally results in a 1d4 bonus. However, Zamothis 
the myriad diseases and poisons which infest the dark and grim also critically succeeds his Teach roll, increasing the table result by two steps. 
places of the world. There’s nothing quite as unsettling than a plague T s boosts the improvement roll to 1d6+1, andf rom this Anathaym gains 
which strikes the character’s home city, especially when they are still 5%, raising her Unarmed skill to 42% - well worth every bruuse. 
within its gates. Likewise finding a venomous serpent in the bed or 
being attacked by giant scorpions can be moments of high drama. 

Diseases and poisons are near infinite in their varieties but, for 
Resustance: How the disease or poison is resisted — either Endur- 

game purposes, arc handled in the same way. 
ance or Willpower, but may have more exotic resistance require- 
ments. Resistance can be rolled at the time of exposure, or deferred 

DiisseeaasseeE AanNDd POoii1ssoOnN TRrAaIiTtSs until the Onset Time to conceal the fact the character might have 
All diseases and poisons manifest a number of traits important been infected or poisoned. 

to their effects. Onset Time: Many diseases and poisons do not take immediate 
Application: 'The method of how the disease or poison is intro- effect. The delay is called the Onset Time, and this can be a matter 

duced into the victim. of seconds, minutes, hours, or even longer. Poisons or diseases pos- 
sessing multiple effects may have different onset times for each one 

& Ingestion - Effects take place through either eating or drinking. 
as described under Conditions. 

& Inhaled — Effects take place through breathing or snorting, 
Duration: How long a disease or poison’s Conditions last. 

& Contact — Effects take place through absorption through the 
Conditions: Every toxin has one or more Conditions. These have 

skin. 
specific effects as described in the Conditions table, below, and if a 

& Injected — Effects take place when the substance is injected 
victim fails to resist he suffers all the Conditions described. 

into the body through piercing. 
Antidote/Cure: If the toxin can be treated it will be noted here. 

Potency: The virulence of the disease or poison. This value is set Otherwise all non-magical diseases and poisons can be alleviated 

against an appropriate resisting skill (usually Endurance or Will- by specific healing magic, such as the Cure Malady spell. Success- 

power) in an opposed roll. If character wins the roll they shrug off ful treatment prevents any further conditions from occurring, yet in 

its effects. If however they lose the roll, then they suffer all of the some circumstances may leave the victim suffering enduring effects 

disease or poison Conditions, each at the appropriate time. that have already been inflicted. 

74



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

Diisease aAnNDd PoiisonN COoNnDdIiTtIioONnSs 

Condition Effects 

Victim is hindered by intense pain. Whether in a location or the entire body, any skill roll involving use of the affected area must also be less or equal to 

Agony the character’s Willpower, otherwise the attempt fails, and they moan or scream in pain. 

Victim suffers asphyxiation — he collapses incapacitated, unable to breathe. The rules for Asphyxiation, found on page 71, are used. Asphyxiation may 

Asphyxiation be asthmatic in nature meaning the victim only suffers shortness of breath, or complete respiratory failure resulting in death. In the later case a victim 

can be kept alive by winning an opposed test of the First Aid skill against the Potency of the diease or poison. 

Bleeding Victim suffers from either internal bleeding or surface haemorrhaging which leads to the effects described in the Blood Loss section on page 71. 

Blindness Victim becomes blind. 

Confusion Victim cannot use any knowledge, communication or magic skill. 

Clontagious Victim can transfer the poison or disease by touch. 

Deafness Victim loses his hearing, 

Death Victim collapses incapacitated, and dies after a number of rounds equal to his CON characteristic. 

Dumbness Victim’s vocal chords are paralysed, preventing verbal communication. 

Exhaustion Victim gains an extra level of Fatigue, on top of any they are currently suffering from. 

Fever Victim’s body temperature fluctuates wildly — from hot to cold — and muscles ache. All skills suffer a difficulty grade of Hard. 

Victim experiences delusions and cannot differentiate between real and imaginary experiences. His skill and abilities are unaffected but his ability to 

Hallucinations relate to the real world is seriously impaired. Under its effects the sufferer tends to experience visions related to his strongest Passions, and any skeletons 

kept in the cupboard, often leading to irrational acts. 

Maiming Victim suffers a permanent loss of 1 Hit Point in the location(s) affected, due to necrosis of the injured tissue. 

P Victim is driven to follow some compulsion; such as avoiding water, paranoia, self mutilation, and so forth. The mania induced by the disease or poison 

- will be noted in its description. 

Victim cannot eat, and must roll against his Endurance every time he performs a stressful physical action to avoid being physically sick. Vomiting lasts 

Nausea for 1d3 rounds during which he cannot act. Long durations of Nausea may cause starvation. 

P Victim is unable physically to move. The affected area, if a location, cannot be used for the duration. If it affects the whole body, the character cannot 

e move at all. 

Savni Victim has their Magic Points (either the Attribute or current number) reduced. Apply the Potency of the disease or poison on the Spirit Damage table 

ppms (page 131) to calculate the dice roll used. Lost Magic Points do not recover until the duration ends. 

Unconscious Victim loses consciousness for a period specified in the description. When consciousness is regained the victim suffers a level of Fatigue. 

Application: Injected 
SaAmMPpLlEe DIiSsEeAaSsEeSs 

Potency: 80 
These are samples of various diseases encountered during 

Resistance: Endurance 
MyTHRAS play, to be used as they stand or as a template for Games 

Onset time: 1d6+6 days 
Master designed infections. 

Duration: 1 week + 1d3 days 

PYyrRoOHhOoXxIiaA Conditions: Disease manifests with the start of Hallucinations. Afler one 
week they also start to sufferfrom Mania (Fire). If the victim somehow survives 

A rather strange disease, pyrohoxia is carried by feral animals 
lo the conclusion of the disease, they then suffer Death. 

such as rodents, and transferred by a successful bite. The infection 
Antidote/Cure: Can be cured by the Healing skill up until the onset of 

gradually spreads to the brain, where it begins to twist the percep- 
Mania, at which point the disease must be treated magically. 

tions and aggression of the victim. No obvious signs exist of pyro- 
hoxia infection, although the behaviour of the creature which bit 

RedD Pox 
them may offer clues. Within several weeks of the bite the victim 

Red pox is a nasty disease spread by skin contact with a person 
starts to suffer increasingly painful headaches, and the eyes turn 

already infected, or with something they have touched. The chance 
bloodshot. At this point the hallucinations begin, strengthening over 

of catching the disease from an object remains for 1d3 days after 
the course of a week into violent waking nightmares. 

contact, making it quite difficult to contain the disease once an out- 
The victim then passes into the terminal stage of the disease, 

break occurs. 
which induces constant shivering accompanied with a mania to get 

Victims initially suffer a minor rash, but within a day come down 
warm by whatever means possible. Eventually this climaxes with a 

with a serious fever which usually renders them bedridden for the 
suicidal desire to jump into fires, lava or even set themselves alight; 

entire duration. During this time the rash evolves into gruesomely 
usually resulting in a paroxysm of violent destruction as they burn 

itchy pustules which burst open at the slightest movement, weeping 
to death. Even if restrained from self-immolation, the victim dies 

small trickles of blood — especially from the armpits and groin. This 
from brain swelling. 

stage can last up to a week or more, potentially proving fatal. 

75



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

Application: Contact Likewise, each day of Necrosis suffered before successful treatment inflicts per- 
Potency: 50 manent damage. 
Resistance: Endurance 
Onset time: 1d6+6 hours Lotus Duusst 
Duration: 1d6+35 days Lotus dust is the natural pollen produced by the blossom of the 

Conditions: Once the disease manifests the victim becomes Contagious. 1 day rare and deadly ebony lotus flower, which grows in the depths of 

later they begin to suffer Fever and Bleeding. Each day the pustules weep blood remote jungles. It takes the form of a fine yellowish powder with a 

the victim loses one level of Fatigue, which does not recover until the duration of sweet, cloying scent; although to smell it is death since the pollen in 

the disease has completed. its natural state is lethal when inhaled or tasted, causing the heart of 

Antidote/Cure: Can be cured by the Healing skill. the victim to burst. Whether from fear or ecstasy is unknown, for few 
beings ever survive long enough to tell. 

SouLl LeechH Despite its dangers many sorcerers breathe the fumes of burning 
Dreaded by priests, shamans and sorcerers alike, soul leech drains lotus dust, which instead of bringing near instant death, infuses the 

their magical vitality, reducing them to powerless prestidigitators. mind of the imbiber with fantastical visions of other worlds. It is 
Although the disease starts with an innocuous enough cough com- said that they learn dark secrets from the euphoric dreams, though 
bined with a degree of lassitude, it soon becomes apparent that their few have the strength of will to extract themselves from such visions. 
paranormal strength is ebbing when spells tire them more easily. Application: Inhaled 

The only extraneous sign of this weakening is that the victim’s Potency: 90 
own web of subcutaneous veins begins to glow a faint purple when Resustance: Willpower 
examined in pitch darkness, a by-product of the disease consuming Onset time: 1d3 rounds 
their Magic Points. Magicians suffering this malady often try to bluff Duration: Instantaneous in its natural state, 2d6 hours if smoked 
through their lack of power hoping that the disease will end before Conditions: Death if natural pollen. Paralysis and Hallucinations if 
arival can take advantage. smoked. At the end of a narcotic dream, the smoker must make another resistance 

Application: Inhaled 10ll otherwise subside into an endless coma, still trapped within his lucid visions. 
Potency: 65 Antidote/Cure: Can be treated by an infusion of the rare Golden Lotus which 
Resistance: Endurance brings complete recovery, otherwise magic must be used. 
Onset time: 1d6 days 
Duration: 1d3+3 weeks SLleEeEpPiInNgG DRrAaUuGgHhTt 
Conditions: Sapping Each week the victim reduces his Magic Points attribute Sleeping draughts are often used to capture or rob characters, 

by 1d6 points. Since these do not recover until the disease ends, a magician can who unwittingly imbibe the tasteless concoction hidden in a mug of 

eventually be reduced to a level of uiter powerlessness. Afler the disease concludes, ale or glass of wine. By the time the character awakens, they are usu- 

the Magic Points attribute recovers at a rate of 1 point per day. ally weak and nauseous — if not from the after-effects of the sleeping 

Antidote/Cure: Can be cured by the Healing skill if rare, mystical ingredi- draught, then due to the alcoholic hangover which accompanied it. 

ents (the precise nature of which depends on the setting) are used. Application: Ingested 
Potency: 60 
Resustance: Willpower 

SaAmMPpLlEe POoIisSoONnSs 
Onset time: 1d6+4 minutes 

CooBbRraA VEenNoOmM 
Perhaps the quintessential venomous snake, a cobra’s venom has 

several effects depending on its application. If injected via bite, the 
venom will inflict a burning pain shortly followed by respiratory dif- 
ficulty which can lead to death. Even surviving a cobra bite comes 
at a horrible cost, the bitten area suffering permanent necrotic dam- 
age. If the venom is spat at the eyes instead of respiratory paralysis 
the venom can often inflict permanent blindness. 

Application: Contact (eyes) or Injected 
Potency: 75 
Resistance: Endurance 
Onset time: Instant if spat in eyes, 1d6+4 minutes if bitten 
Duration: 1d3+35 days 
Conditions: If spat into the eyes both Agony and Blindness are instant, last- 

ing the entire duration. Butten victims also begin with Agony but can struggle 
along until 1d6+06 hours afler the bite when Asphyxiation strikes, usually result- 
ing in death, unless Furst Aid us successfully applied to keep the victim breathing. 
Survivors will then suffer Necrosis, losing 1 Hit Pownt per day from the location 
bitten, until the venom s somehow purged or it naturally ends. 

Antidote/Cure: Can be ameliorated with the Healing skill. However blind- 
ness, if not treated before the end of the venom’s duration becomes permanent. Envenomed blades: a favourite of every assassin 

76



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

Duration: 1d6+3 hours ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Conditions: Unconsciousness. Victim falls into a deep sleep, and cannot be Anathaym owns a partial suit of bronze Hoplite Plate. This comprises 

woken until the duration ends. a crested helm, a cuirass and two bracers. The panoply covers five of her 
Antidote/Cure: Can be counteracted by the Healing skill, and use of a strong body locations, and has an Armour Penalty of -4 which counts both against 

stimulant. her Initiative, and her running and sprinting speeds due to the hindrance the 
strapped preces have on her body movement. 

Additionally the armour has a total ENC of 20 simply due to the weight 

EnNCcuUMmBbRrAaNnCcEe of the heavy bronze. If she carried the armour on her back, whilst also bear- 
ing her spear;, shorisword and hoplite shield, Anathaym would have a total 

Encumbrance represents both the mass and bulk of an item. The 
Encumbrance of 20+2+1+5=26 which s more than twice her STR of 

greater the encumbrance value the more difficult it is to carry it. 
11, rendering her Burdened. 

Correlating ENC with SIZ can be a challenge: light but bulky 
However, if she wears her armour instead, the ENC of the panoply s 

items often impose just as much of a burden as small but heavy ones. 
halved, reducing her total Encumbrance to 10+2+1+5 =16, leaving her a 

As a rule of thumb 3 ENC is equivalent to 1 SIZ, but, depending on 
little extra capacity to carry extra equipment, and not be hindered by her load. 

the item, Games Masters may want to adjust the ratio down to 2:1 
or even l:1. A head-sized lump of lead, for instance, is far heavier 
than a similar sized lump of rock. Conversely a large sack loosely The amount armour counts towards Encumbrance Capacity 

filled with goose-down might have a ratio of 5:1. As always, com- depends on whether it is worn or carried. 

mon sense should prevail in such circumstances. 
& When worn, only half the total ENC of the armour is 

Items that have a zero ENC value are, on their own, inconse- 
counted towards Encumbrance 

quential; however consider that 20 zero ENC items equal 1 ENC. 
& When carried, the full ENC value of the armour is counted 

towards Encumbrance 
EnNCcuUMmBbRrAaNnCcEe CAaPpAaCcIiTtYy 

Characters can carry a total ENC equal to their STR x2 with 
relative ease. Everyday clothing does not contribute to this capacity, NoNn HUuMmAaNn EnNCcuUMmBbRrAaNnCcEe 
but armour does — see the notes on Armour ENC below. Whilst the encumbrance rules work fine for human scaled charac- 

If the total ENC borne exceeds STR x2 then the character is ters, they can begin to break down for creatures of larger or smaller 
considered to be Burdened. This has the following effects: dimensions. The best way to avoid scaling issues is to assume that 

arms and equipment for each species scale in proportion with their 
& Skills using STR or DEX as part of their base (including 

user’s size. Thus a great axe used by a minotaur would be slightly 
combat skills) become one grade harder 

larger than one used by a (human) royal guard, as would its armour. 
& Base Movement Rate drops by 2 metres, and the character 

To calculate the encumbrance of proportionally sized equip- 
can no longer sprint 

ment, add together all the ENC values of everything carried by the 
& Carrying the load counts as Medium activity for Fatigue 

creature, then multiply the final result by the ratio of the average SIZ 
purposes 

of a member of that race divided by the average SIZ of a human. 

If the borne ENC exceeds STR x3 then the character is consid- 

ered to be Overloaded. The effects are thus: Final Encumbrance = Total ENC x (Average SIZ of species/13) 

& Skills using STR or DEX as part of their base (including 
combat skills) become two grades harder 

& Base Movement Rate drops to half normal, and the character ALlTtEeRrNnAaTtIiVvEe EnNCcuUMmBbRrAaNnCcEe RUuLlEeSs 
cannot move faster than a walk Keeping detailed track of encumbrance adds considerable effort to maintaining 

& Carrying the load counts as Strenuous activity for Fatigue character sheets, especially when items are picked up or looted, and as a consequence 

purposes many groups simply hand-wave encumbrance as being an unnecessary hassle in general 

play. For those who still wish to keep a rough track of encumbrance but want something 

Characters cannot carry a total ENC more than their STR x4, less maths intensive, consider the following alternative, which does not track items car- 

cither the mass or unwieldy bulk of the objects proving to be too ried in strict terms of their ENC value. 
much to bear for more than a short distance. 

& All characters can carry a number of Items equal to half their STR without 

being encumbered. Over STR/2 and up to STR, they are considered Bur- 

ARrmMOoUuRr ENC dened. Over STR to STRx1.5 they are Qverloaded. 

When considering its encumbering nature, armour has a num- One Item is equivalent to anything that can be comfortably carried in one hand. 

ber of different effects: it not only hinders Initiative (see Armour Things that are two-handed or are strapped to an arm (a shield, say) count as 

Penalty), and slows gaits faster than a walk (see Moving in Armour two ltems. Note that the SIS of the creature will influence what is considered 

page 70), but also burdens its bearer with its bulky weight. one or two items. For a giant, a greatsword could comfortably be counted as one 

item, whereas for human-sized creatures it would clearly be two. 

Worn armour of any kind does not contribute towards ENC. If carried, then 

it counts as its equivalent Armour Penalty value. 

~ 

77



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

Continuing with the minotaur example, we find its proportional equal to the Damage Taken column of the Falling Distance 
size ratio is 1.7 (22/13). Thus a minotaur wearing full Hoplite pan- including any reductions for objects of smaller size. 
oply and wielding its great axe would have a total encumbrance of 
27 (28 halved plus 2 for the great axe, and the total multiplied by 

FaALlLliInNgG fFrRoOmM Aa 
1.7) Still well within the unburdened limit of STRx2 which for an 
average minotaur is 34. MOoVvIiNnGg VEeHhIiCcLlEe 

Although this sum may require a few seconds to work out, it Damage sustained from a fall from a moving vehicle, such as 
simplifies the entire process to a single calculation, and avoids time a chariot, depends on the vehicle’s speed and the distance fallen. 
consuming book keeping. Assume that the speed, in metres per Combat Round, is equal to 

half the height shown on the Falling Distance table. A chariot mov- 
ing at 20m per Combat Round would inflict 2d6 damage to two 

FaALlLliInNgG random locations if a character should fall from it. 

The amount of damage suffered in a fall depends on the distance 
of the drop. Armour points do not reduce falling damage. 

FaAtTiIgGuUEe 
FaALlLliInNgG DiiSstTaAnNCcEe TAaBbLlEe 

Fatigue measures tiredness and its incremental effects. It is an 
Distance Fallen Damage Taken important aspect in MYTHRAS as it is used to track many different 
Im orless No damage. things from strenuous activity to the debilitating effects of disease 
2m to Sm 1d6 points of damage to a random location. or magic. 
6m to 10m 2d6 points of damage to two random locations. 

Ilmto 15m 3d6 points of damage to three random locations. PHhYySsIicCaALl EFffFoORrTt 
16m to 20m 4d6 points of damage to four random locations. The primary way of accruing Fatigue is by engaging in some 
Each +5m +1d6 damage. form of physical activity. The more arduous the exercise or work, 

the more quickly it tires the character. There are three classes of 
effort: Light, Medium and Strenuous. The length of time a char- 

& Damage is rolled separately for eack location; it is not spread 
acter can engage in an activity without becoming fatigued is deter- 

among them. 
mined by his CON, as detailed under each category. Once this time 

& Creatures of smaller size suffer less from a fall. Those of SIZ 
has elapsed characters must make an appropriate skill roll — either 

8 to 9 treat the distance fallen as one metre less. A creature 
Athletics, Brawn or Endurance — to resist gaining a level of Fatigue. 

of SIZ 6 to 7 treats the distance fallen as three metres less. A 
Unless the recipient of some form of magic that naturally extends 

creature of SIZ 4 to 5 treats the distance fallen as five metres 
wakefulness, all characters need sleep. A character can remain 

less. A creature of SIZ 2 to 3 treats the distance fallen as eight 
awake for a number of hours equal to twice CON before needing to 

metres less. A creature of SIZ 1 or less treats the distance 
make an Endurance roll. If successful, the character can continue to 

fallen as ten metres less. 
function normally for a number of hours equal to half CON before 

Creatures of larger size suffer more from a fall. For every 10 
needing to make a further Endurance roll, although this roll will be 

points above SIZ 20 the creature adds +1d6 to the damage. 
one grade harder than the last. Each failed roll accrues one level of 

Thus a SIZ 35 creature which drops from a height of 2m 
fatigue. 

would take 3d6 damage to a random location. 
& Acrobatics can be used to mitigate falling damage — a success- 

ful roll allows the character to treat the fall as if it were two EFfFfeCcTtSs oOFf FaAtTiIgGuUEe 
metres shorter than it actually is. In addition, as long as the Every failed roll accrues a level of Fatigue. Each level of Fatigue 
roll is successful and the character does not suffer a Serious carries penalties for skill use, movement, Initiative and Action Points. 
or Major wound due to the fall, the character lands relatively Asphyxiation, Blood Loss, and some types of magic also contribute 
safely and is not prone. to Fatigue accrual. 
Characters falling onto soft surfaces may treat the distance For most characters, activities of any kind become near impos- 
they fall as halved for the purposes of damage. This is always sible when the level of Incapacitated is reached. At this stage the 
at the Games Master’s discretion. character is still conscious but incapable of anything but the most 
Characters falling onto damaging surfaces (such as a pit of desperate of activities. 
spikes) will suffer the effects of the surface to all locations that Beyond Incapacitated, characters cannot act at all. The Fatigue 
are damaged in the fall. levels — Semi-Conscious, Comatose and Dead — are generally 

reserved for measuring the most extreme effects of suffocation, dis- 
case, blood loss, starvation, exposure, and so forth. 

FaALlLliInNgG OBbJjEeCcTtSs It is perfectly possible to accrue Fatigue from several sources, 

A falling object imparts an amount of damage based on its SIZ potentially making some situations more dangerous. 

and the distance of the fall. An object imparts 1d6 damage for every For example, a thief climbs the flanks of an extinct volcano to reach a 

6 points of SIZ (or fraction thereof), plus an amount of damage long-forgotten temple, in which fantastically precious jewels are reputed to be 
hidden. By the time he crests the crater rim his Fatigue level has reached Tured. 
Spurred on by sighting the ruins upon an island at the centre of the flooded 

78



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

FaATtiIgGuUEe LEeVvEeLlSs 

Skill Grade Initiative Action Points Recovery Period 

Fresh No Penalties 

Winded Hard No Penalty No Penalty No Penalty 15 minutes 

Tired Hard -1 metre No Penalty No Penalty 3 hours 

Wearied Formidable -2 metres -2 No Penalty 6 hours 

Exhausted Formidable Halved -4 -1 12 hours 

Debilitated Herculean Halved -6 -2 18 hours 

Incapacitated Herculean Immobile -8 -3 24 hours 

Semi-Conscious Hopeless No Activities Possible No Activities Possible No Activities Possible 36 hours 

Comatose No Activities Possible No Activities Possible No Activities Possible No Activities Possible 48 hours 

Dead Dead Never 

PHhYySsIicCaALl EFffFoORrTt TAaBbLlEe types of activity contribute towards Fatigue. But common sense 
should apply. A character dressed in full plate armour, in a tropical 

How 

Effort Long? Example Skill Roll jungle, on a hot summer’s day, could not spend three hours hack- 
ing his way through the foliage without suffering fatigue in some 

Very Easy grade roll vs 
way. Similarly carrying heavy loads, trekking uphill, foot chases, long 

Activity that places either Athletics, Brawn 
swims or digging out an ancient necropolis are all going to take their 

. no strain on the or Endurance according 
i CON in . 

Light b body. All reasonable  to the task (Athletics for toll on a character, potentially tiring him at a crucial moment. 
ours 

activities at a steady exercise; Brawn for heavy 

pace. lifting; Endurance for 

general activities). 
FIirREeSs 

i Manual labour; 
i CON in i i As above, but at Easy Fires are always a source of danger when used as a weapon or 

Medium . sustained physical 
minutes i grade. rage out of control. They damage both people and objects; how 

exercise. 
much is dependent on the intensity of the source. The Fire Inten- 

. Standard grade roll vs 
CON in i i i sity table below gives five different intensities for heat damage, with 

Combat; struggling either Athletics, Brawn 
seconds . . some examples. 

against the elements;  or Endurance according 
(rounded up . L . The damage inflicted per round is given in the Damage column. 

Strenuous physical activity in to the task (Athletics for 
to the next . Being relatively small, Intensity 1 and 2 sources apply their damage 

extremely adverse exercise; Brawn for heavy 
Combat i e to a single Hit Location, usually that touching the source. Intensity 

circumstances. lifting; Endurance for 
Round) 

Combat). 3 and 4 sources are larger, applying damage to nearest 1d4+1 Hit 
Locations, indicating the degree of radiant heat. Intensity 5 sources 
affect all Hit Locations simultaneously. 

Fire clearly has the ability to ignite flammable materials. If not 

caldera, the thieff oolishly undertakes the swim before resting; in the process losing extinguished immediately such materials combust within a number 

several more levels of Fatiguefromf ailed Swim rolls. When the scaly guardian of of rounds as indicated by the fire’s Intensity. Once ignited, flamma- 

the sacred temple pulls him under the surface, the fatigue accrualfrom drowning ble materials burn until physically extinguished. Damage is applied 

startsfrom has current level of Exhausted, and he swiftly dies, lacking the energy directly to the Hit Points of the material, ignoring Armour Points 

to put up much of a fight. and to any flesh beneath. If left uncontrolled it spreads to a number 
of Hit Locations, per round, equal to its Intensity. 

REeCcOoVvEeRrIinNgG fFrRoOmM FaATtiIgGuUEe 
Characters recover from Fatigue depending on their Healing FIirReE InNTtEeNnSsIitTyY TAaBbLlEe 

Rate. The amount of complete rest needed to recover from each Intensity Examples Time to Ignite Damage 
level of accrued Fatigue is equal to the Recovery Period divided by 

1 Candle 1d4 1d2 
the character’s Healing Rate. 

2 Torch 1d3 1d4 
Note that the table represents fatigue recovery for physical exer- 

3 Campfire 1d2 1d6 
tion. Fatigue recovery can be much faster when recovering from 
asphyxiation or slower if recuperating from blood loss. Room filling 

4 . 1d2 2d6 
conflagration 

5 Volcanic lava Instant 3d6 
MAaNnAaGgIiNnGg FaAtTiIgGuUEe 

Managing Fatigue, and its effects makes for additional book-keep- 
ing. To simplify things, Games Masters can decide that only certain 

79



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

PEerRmMAaNnEeNnTt InNjJuUrRyY TAaBbLlEe 
HEeAaLlIinNgG fFrRoOmM InNjJuUrRyY 

1d3 Hit Point Reduction Maiming Result 
Natural healing from wounds and injuries is based on the charac- 

If a limb, this represents the maiming 
ter’s Healing Rate. The Healing Rate dictates how many Hit Points 

of a hand or foot. If the head, the 
are recovered in a location depending on the injury’s nature: Character permanently . 

i . character loses one of his sensory 
1 loses one third of the Hit 

& Minor Wounds: Days L. . organs, eye, ear, nose or tongue 
Points in that location . . . 

& Serious Wounds: Weeks Anywhere else it denotes a disfiguring 

scar. 
& Major Wounds: Months 

o q A limb is maimed from the elbow or 
aracter permanen 

Thus a character with a Healing Rate of 3 who suffers damage 1D Y knee down. The head loses two sensory 
loses two thirds of the Hit . 

taking him to —3 in a Hit Location, a Serious Wound, will heal nat- . i organs. Torso exhibits a gruesomely 
Points in that location i 

urally at a rate of 3 Hit Points per week until his wound goes above horrible scar. 

zero, and then heal 3 Hit Points per day until fully recovered. Limbs are maimed from the shoulder 

There are certain restrictions on natural healing: or hip down. The head either loses 

L. three sensory organs, half the face or 
& The healing character cannot engage in strenuous activity: Location is reduced to a L 

3 . A the entire jaw. Chest or abdomen shows 
otherwise the Healing Rate is reduced by 1d3. Thus, a char- single Hit Point . . 

such a horrific scar or deformation 
acter recovering from even a Minor Wound could find his nobody seeing the healed wound can 
progress halted if he decides to engage any physical tasks that comprehend how the victim survived. 
might exacerbate his injuries. 

& Natural healing will not begin to heal a Major Wound until 
that location has been treated with a successful Healing roll 
(see page 46). Non-dismembering Major Wounds which are struck there means the attack actually misses! Characters vindictive 
not treated within a number of days equal to one twentieth of enough to target such a maimed limb using Choose Location must 
the Healing skill become maimed, permanently reducing the roll a 1d3 to see if they actually hit the remaining parts. 
Hit Points of the location. 

Guidance on how to stage combat to take into account these 
ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 

lengthy healing times is provided in the Games Mastery chapter (see Afier months of practice Anathaym finally succeeds in defeating Xenos in 
Pacing Combat Encounters page 285). the practice circle, humiliating the proud noble by tripping him, and_forcing 

has surrender at spear point in_front of his freends. She spends that evening 

MAaGgIiCcAaLl HEeAaLlIinNgG Joolishly drinking wine in celebration. When she eventually leaves the tavern, 

Some magic can heal the wounds suffered by a victim. Yet there the warriwress s too drunk to notice the sinuster cloaked figures who follow, 

are specific restrictions as to what level of wound can be treated by and drag her into a dark alleyway. 

each spell. For example the Common Magic spell Heal cures only Wihilst two of her assaullers pin her down, the third draws a club which 

Minor Wounds, whereas the Sorcery spell of Regeneration can heal he smashes down onto her spear hand, twice, pulping every bone in the append- 

both Minor and Serious Wounds. There are few magics which can age. Then, the men pick her up, laughing cruelly, and Anathaym recognises the 

reverse the traumatic injuries of a Major Wound. superctlious voice of her rwval as she passes out. When she finally awakens 

No matter how petty the healing spell or miracle, its application she discovers herself abandoned in the dry hills many leagues from Meeros. 

is always enough to stabilise any type of wound, preventing bleeding Sufferingfrom the pain and delirium of the Major Wound, 1t takes four 

and immediate death even if it doesn’t actually cure the underlying days to stumble back to Meeros, but shef inally reaches the city’s modest Shrine 

injury. Note that this only applies to gross physical trauma, not to of Healing, located in the poor quarter. The serving acolyte explains that 

conditions brought about by suffocation, poison, and the like. the wound s beyond her powers to heal magically, and too much time has 
already passed to avoid it being maimed. However, she successfully performs 
her Healing roll, ensuring that the hand does not become infected and can start 

PEerRmMAaNnEeNnTt InNJjuURrIiEeSs 
lo recover; albeit with slightly twistedf ingers andf rozen knuckles. 

Some Major Wounds, and certain poisons or diseases inflict 
Anathaym has hitle chowe but to heal naturally. With her right arm at 

maiming injuries; for example horribly crushed and severed limbs, 
-6 1t would normally take a month at her Healing Rate of 3 to recover to 

or the necrotic effects of venoms. The result of this damage perma- 
the point at which the Major Wound s reduced to just a Serious one. The 

nently reduces the Hit Points on that location, forever weakening it. 
mavming injury however; has permanently reduced her limb by two Hit Points. 

Alocation maimed in this way uses the diminished Hit Point value to 
T'us new level means the Serious Wound threshold of that arm is now -1 Hit 

calculate its new Serious and Major Wound thresholds. 
Pownt, so 1t takes two months to recover — at which point another visit to the 

Tor permanent injuries caused by accident or battle, roll 1d3 and 
acolyte magically cures the remaining damage. 

consult the following table to see the extent of the maiming: 
Her right hand crippled to the point of near uselessness, Anathaym is 

In those cases where the maiming involved the loss of a limb, 
drwen by her hatredfor Xenos, and begins to learn how to use her spear left 

reduce the d20 numbers for that Hit Location by an appropriate 
handed... 

amount. For example the Right Arm of a humanoid is normally 
struck on a roll of 13-15 on a d20. If however the arm was sev- 
ered at the elbow then locations 13-14 no longer exist, and being 

o 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

InNaAnNIimMAaTtEe OBbJjEeCcTtSs ARrMmOoUuRr aAnNDd HIiTt POoIiNnTtSs 
InNaAnNIimMAaTtEe OBbJjEeCcTtSs Object Armour Points Hit Points 

All inanimate objects possess Armour Points and Hit Points 
Boulder 10 40 

which are used to determine resistance to damage and destruction. 
Castle gate 8 120 

Armour Points reduce damage before Hit Points are affected. Once 
Castle wall (2m section) 10 250 

an object’s Hit Points have been reduced to zero, it is useless. 
Usually inanimate objects offer no resistance to damage, save for Chain/shackle 8 8 

their Armour Points. However in the case of items that can restrict Club 4 4 

or offer a significant resistance to breakage attempts (such as a Dagger 6 4 

barred door, or ropes used to restrain hands and feet), the character Hut wall (2m section) 3 15 

must succeed with either a Brawn, Unarmed or weapon attack roll, Iron door 12 75 

as appropriate, to inflict damage. A successful roll deals damage to Rope 6 3 
the item as per the weapon type; a failed roll has simply failed to 

War sword 6 10 
apply enough force or damage to the item to deteriorate its condi- 

Wooden chair 2 6 
tion. Refer to the description of the Brawn skill to determine what 

Wooden door (normal) 4 25 
damage it inflicts. 

The Inanimate Objects table gives some example objects, along Wooden door (reinforced) 6 30 

with their Armour Points and Hit Points. Wooden fence (2m section) 4 5 

UssIinNgG WEeAaPpOoNnSs AGgAaIiNnSsTt CHhEeAaTt FaATtEe 
Characters can use a Luck Point to re-roll any dice roll that 

InNaAnNIimMAaTtEe OBbJjEeCcTtSs affects them. This can be a skill roll, damage roll or anything else 
Using a weapon against an inanimate object with Armour Points that has some effect. Characters can even force an opponent to 

equal to or greater than those of the weapon deals damage to both re-roll an attack or damage roll made against them. 
the object and the weapon. For instance, using an axe on an anvil 
may damage the anvil, but the axe itself will be destroyed long DEeSsPpEeRrAaTtEe EFffFoORrTt 
before the anvil is. The Games Master should exercise discretion If a character has exhausted his Action Points during a fight and 
on which weapons or tools can affect which objects. A chisel, for needs to find that last burst of desperate energy to perhaps avoid 
example, is explicitly designed to carve wood or stone whilst a sword, a messy demise, he may spend a Luck Point to gain an additional 
although sharp, is not. The chisel would therefore not take damage Action Point. 
from something it is attempting to carve whereas a sword most likely 
would. MIiTtIigGAaTtEe DAaMmAaGgEe 

A character who suffers a Major Wound may spend a Luck Point 
to downgrade the injury to a Serious Wound. This reduces the dam- 
age taken to one Hit Point less than what would be required to inflict 

Luck POoIiNnTtSs a Major Wound. 
Luck Points help differentiate heroes from the rank and file. They 

represent a character’s ability to potentially turn failure into success, 
Group Luck Points

and even cheat death, roupP OINTS 
The Personal Connections boxed text on page 22 describes how, 

Every character starts with a number of Luck Points as described 
when characters form personal connections during character cre- 

in the Attributes section of the Basic Character Creation chapter. 
ation, the group as a whole gains a pool of Luck Points distinct from 

Luck Points can be used during play and, at the beginning of the 
those available personally. This pool of Group Luck Points is avail- 

next session, replenish to their usual value. 
able to all members of the team to use in precisely the same way as 

For example, Emma and her friends meet every Friday for their weekly 
personal Luck Points but only when the character wanting to draw 

MrTHRAS game. One Friday might Emma, playing Anathaym, is gwen cause to 
upon the pool needs to do so to aid one of his fellows. 

use all her character’s Luck Points for a variety of reasons. Out of Luck Points, 
The Games Master should keep track of the Group Luck Points 

Anathaym manages to survwe with no catastrophic consequences till the end of 
pool (or the players can do this, nominating one of their number to 

the game session. However, when the players reconvene on the following Friday, 
keep track). Group Luck Points refresh in the same way as personal 

Anathaym’s Luck Points will have replenished back to their normal value. 
Luck Points: that is, the pool is fully restored at the beginning of the 

Luck Points only increase if the POW characteristic increases, or 
next game session. However if Games Masters feel that the Group 

some form of magic provides a temporary increase in some fashion. 
Luck Points pool is offering too much of an advantage, or even being 
abused, it can be made to replenish at an appropriate point in the 

UssIinNgG Luck POoIiNnTtSs story — at the end of an adventure for example, or after a reasonable 
Luck points can be used in a variety of ways. Only one Luck period of down-time. 

Point can be used in support of a particular action. Each of the 
following options costs a single Luck Point. 

81



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

For instance, a character with “ITrust Chieftain’ might, if his 
PAaSsSsIioOnNSs chieftain acts treacherously, either reduce his Passion or turn into 

Introduced during the character creation chapters, a Passion ‘Distrust Chieftain’ at the same percentage. The Games Master 
is any deeply held commitment that has the capacity to influence needs to determine if a Passion reduces or reverses. If it reduces 
events during play. Although they can be used as stand-alone abili- then it does so according to the strength of the source of the change. 
ties (to call them skills is to do them a disservice), passions are further The Deepening and Waning table shows by how much the Pas- 
expanded below to explain in more detail how they work, and how sion changes. 
they can influence MYTHRAS characters and campaigns. 

In summary, Passions can be used thus: DEeEePpEeNnIinNgG AanNDd WAaNnIiNnGg 

& To augment another skill, reflecting the depth of one’s feeling Change +/- 

and how it drives action. Weak 1d10 

When used in this regard the Passion adds 20 % of ts value to a skill Moderate 1d10+5 

being used, as long as the augmentation s thematically and dramatically Strong 1d10+10 

important. 
& As an ability in its own right to drive choices, desires, and Further advice for Games Masters on using Passions to drive a 

emotional actions and responses. scenario or campaign is provided in the Games Mastery Chapter. 
When used in this way a standard roll is made against a Passiwn to 

determine how strongly the character thinks andf eels about something If 
a roll s a success then the character acts in-line with what the Passion 
would dictate. If the roll fails then the character can act freely without SUuRrVvIivVaALl 
Jeeling constrained by the Passion’s drives. Characters may find themselves in hostile environments: deserts, 

& To oppose other Passions — even those held by the same char- arctic landscapes, mountains, rain-lashed moorlands, and so on. In 

acter. This is typically used where two Passions would con- such environments characters may find themselves battling the ele- 

flict. For instance a personal love might dictate a course of ments, and the three big killers: exposure, starvation, and thirst. 

action that would be contrary to an oath or loyalty. Here use Each danger has a specific onset time before a critical point is 

an opposed roll between the two Passions with the more suc- reached, after which debilitation occurs at a steady rate: 

cessful determining how the character acts. 
& Exposure occurs when the body is insufficiently protected 

As a general measure of depth of commitment, belief, and 
against a hostile environment. Assuming suitable clothing it 

loyalty to a cause. The higher the Passion’s value, the more 
usually starts to take effect after CON hours. The subsequent 

committed the character is. Characters with similar Passions 
Exposure Rate can range from daily to mere minutes depend- 

can compare and contrast their ratings to determine who 
ing on the weather conditions. See Temperature, page 84. 

exhibits the deeper commitment. 
Starvation takes place after an extended period without food. 

To resist some form of psychological manipulation or magical 
Critical levels of starvation begin after a number of days 

domination. In certain cases where a character is being forced 
equal to half CON. After this the Starvation Rate is daily. 

into performing an act contrary to his Passions, he may use 
Dehydration begins after CON x4 hours; although in arid or 

substitute his Passion for the usual Willpower in the opposed 
hot environments this might be CON x3 or even CON x2. 

roll. 
The ensuing Dehydration Rate depends on the ambient arid- 

During character creation characters establish up to three start- ity or humidity of the environment. See Precipitation page 

ing Passions; however new Passions can be developed at any point 84. 

during a MYTHRAS game session if the circumstances warrant it. 
Once any of the above conditions take hold characters start to 

One might instantly develop ‘Hate X’ where someone else does 
accrue Fatigue levels. An Endurance roll is required at onset, which 

something that would strongly invoke hatred to arise. A lord or chief 
is then repeated every time the Exposure, Starvation or Dehydration 

calling for an oath would immediately establish a Passion of ‘Loyalty 
Rate cycles. If the roll is failed then a level of Fatigued is accrued. 

to X’ as soon as that oath is taken or sworn — something explored 
Care should be taken to apply any skill penalties suffered for 

further in the Cults and Brotherhoods chapter. 
the current level of Fatigue. Eventually their increasing debilitation 

Passions developed during play in this way cost no Experience 
steadily wears down the character’s capabilities until Incapacitation 

Rolls, and are established there and then. Of course, characters can 
is reached. Thereafter, without help death will swiftly follow. 

also choose to establish a Passion during improvement, at the cost of 
an Experience roll to gain a Passion at its base value: see the chart 
on page 23 of the Culture and Community chapter. 

TrRaApPSs 
DEeEePpEeNnIinNgG AanNDd WAaNnIiNnGg Traps are ubiquitous devices used by every culture from the dig- 

Passions can increase during a game independently of Experi- ging of pitfalls to capture animals to death-traps guarding tombs for 

ence Rolls, based on the strength of whatever occurred to trigger all eternity. These devices are built for a range of purposes, each 

the increase. Also Passions can, and do, wane. A strongly held belief specifically tailored to raising an alarm, capturing interlopers, or 

can be shaken by many things leading to that Passion being either maiming and killing thieves outright. 

reduced or, in more extreme circumstances, reversed completely. 

82



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

Constructing traps requires that the builder knows either the 
Mechanisms or Engineering skill. Small traps such as bear traps or BUuIiLldDIinNgG TRrAaPpSs 
trapped locks require Mechanisms, whereas large scale construc- Use the Task rules (page 60 onwards) as the basis for building 

tions like spiked pits or rolling boulders need Engineering. traps, with the task round measured in hourly increments depending on 

Beyond hiring the constructing craftsman, traps often have very the sophistication of the device. If Enhancements are achieved, boost the 

expensive component or manual labour costs. As a general guideline trap's Difficulty by +5% for each Enhancement gained. 

alarms cost the skill of the creator in copper pieces, ensnaring traps 
the same in silver, and death-traps require payment in gold. 

All traps have a Difficulty rating which represents how difficult it devices is limited by the skill of its creator. Force is noted for those 

is to perceive, disarm or avoid. This value is treated as its skill when traps which fire projectiles which can be parried. 

resisted in an opposed roll. 
DeeAaTthH TRrAaPp DAaMmAaGgEe LimMIiTtSs 

Despite the many entertaining tales told by storytellers, traps — 
especially those intended to kill — rarely have a method of cleverly Maker’s Skill Damage SizelForce 

avoiding or reversing their effects once set in motion. Without magic 1-10% 1d2 Small 

or good fortune, those caught in a death-trap usually succumb to 11-20% 1d4 Small 
its highly efficient purpose. In short, they are not intended to be 

21-30% 1d6 Medium 
survivable. Unless the trap has some cunning design or is some sort 

31-40% 1d8 Medium 
of enduring magical enchantment, once it has been sprung it must 

41-50% 1d10 Large 
be manually reset. 

51-60% 2d6 Large 

61-70% 1d8+1d6 Huge 
TrRaApP TRrAaIiTtSs 

71-80% 2d8 Huge 
Traps are described using the following traits. 

81-90% 1d10+1d8 Enormous 

PUuRrPpOoSsEe 91-100% 2d10 Enormous 

The purpose of the trap. 

& Alarm — Trap sends a silent or audible signal that it has been SaAmMPpLlEe TRrAaPpSs 
triggered. These are example traps which Games Masters can use as tem- 

& Ensnaring — Trap is designed to capture anyone who triggers plates to create their own devious devices. 

or enters it. 
CRrUuSsHhIinNgG ROoOoFf 

& Maiming — Trap is intended to critically injure whoever trig- 
This trap often takes the form of a small room or short length of 

gers it. 
corridor. The trap has a lure of some sort, usually something of an 

& Death — Trap is intended to kill those who activate its lethal 
artistic or valuable nature which attracts the victim to enter. Most 

devices. 
crushing roof traps are dead ends with only one entry, perhaps with 
a false door on the other side; although rarely they are utilised as 

TRrIigGgGEerR additional security to prevent illicit access to a real doorway. 
The way the trap is set off. When triggered the entry portal slams closed with a metal port- 

cullis which locks into place. The roof then gradually lowers, its 
DiirfrficuLlty support pillars sinking into the floor as their supporting sand flows 

The challenge rating of the trap, which is equal to the value of away; or if the ceiling is suspended from some sort of ratchet device, 
the Mechanisms or Engineering skill which created it. For instance a the chains play out. 
scything blade trap built into the base of a treasure chest by a crafts- Due to the difficulty of carving entire roofs from a single piece of 
man with Mechanisms 70% grants the trap a Difficulty of 70%. rock, most ceilings are actually made of plastered wood, weighted 
The trap would thereafter use this value in opposed rolls to see if the on top with large rocks to provide extra mass. Unless the creator 
blade can be spotted, evaded or disarmed. deliberately incorporated a secret trapdoor in the ceiling to pro- 

vide an emergency escape route, victims typically suffer a long, slow 
REeSsIisStTaAnNCcEe 

demise as the weight of the roof crushes them to death. 
How the trap is resisted — typically using Brawn, Evade or par- 

Purpose: Death 
rying with a Combat Style which uses a shield. Resistance is rolled 

Trigger: Moving the lure object 
when the trap is triggered. 

Difficulty: 80% 

ErfFfecCTt Resistance: Evade to dive clear of the room before the entry slams shut. If 
several characters are trapped within the chamber; they may attempt to support 

What happens when the trap is sprung, and the victim(s) fail to 
the roof with Brawn whilst a companion attempts to open the door or find 

resist. Usually this results in the alerting of antagonists if an alarm or 
something with whick to wedge or support the roof In this circumstance add 

the capture of victims if designed to ensnare. Maiming and death- 
the SIS and STR of every resisting character to calculate their combined 

traps obviously injure the victim, although some death-traps utilise 
Damage Modifier;, and use this value with the highest Brawn skill of the 

other means than direct damage to inflict harm, such as drowning or 
party aganst the trap’s Damage Modifier of 2d8. 

poison. To restrict overly deadly traps, the damage inflicted by these 

83



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

Effect: Once the ceiling lowers far enough, victims become pinned to thef loor, ViissiiBbIiLlIitTyY TAaBbLlEe 
and receive 2d8 damage per round to a random Hit Location (armour does 
not protect), eventually crushing every bone in their body. Moonless 

Conditions  Daylight Twilight  Moonlight . 
Night 

PIitTfFaALlLl Clear 500 300 50 25 

A pitfall is an archetypal trap used by every culture. It can take 
Overcast 400 250 50 25 

the form a simple dug pit, covered by branches and leaves or reach 
Moderate 

the sophistication of stone walled sumps beneath hinged false floors 150 100 25 15 
Fog 

which are counterbalanced to swing back up into place after a victim 
Dense Fog 50 30 15 10 

drops in. 
Wind-driven 

Pitfalls need not be particularly deep. If designed for capture, a 35 25 10 5 
snow 

simple amphora or lobster pot shape will prevent escape by climb- 
Sand/dust 

ing, as will walls which are chiselled smooth or made from crumbling 20 15 10 5) 
storm 

material which gives way under a character’s weight. 
Pits which are instead intended to kill usually line the floor with 

dozens of stakes, closely packed so that a falling character will inev- 
larger objects increase the range by one multiple for every 10 points 

itably become impaled. Other options could include filling the bot- 
of SIZ over 20. So a SIZ 22 minotaur can be seen at double the 

tom with a weak acid, water deep enough to drown in, or starving 
distance, whereas a SIZ 37 cyclops could be spotted at triple the 

rats. 

Purpose: Ensnaring or Death distance. 

Trigger: Walking across thefalse surface covering the pit The same values can also be used for the primary senses of other 
creatures, such as an acute sense of smell or hearing. However in 

Difficulty: 60% 
these cases it an alternate modifier should be applied rather than 

Resistance: Eaither Evade to jump clear or a Hard Athletics roll to catch the 
SIZ. 

edge as they drop. 
Effect: The drop into the pit inflicts 2d6 damage to a random Hit Location, 
armour does not protect. Secondary effects are left to the Games Master’s 
imagination. WEeAaTtHhEeRr 

SpPeEaArR TRrAaPp Weather conditions can have a significant effect on the local envi- 
ronment. The main aspects of weather are precipitation, tempera- 

Spear traps are complex devices requiring hidden niches or a 
ture, and wind. These are detailed for the purposes of modelling 

separate chamber in which their mechanical launchers must be set. 
weather magic, reduction of character skills, and calculating the 

Their primary mode of operating is to drive a spear through a wall 
effects of weather on Survival. No tables are provided to generate 

or floor, powered by a counterweighted lever or compressed spring. 
random weather conditions, which are very much setting dependent. 

The manner of their placement can be quite inventive. Instead 
of the traditional spear hidden behind plaster or bas-reliefs, some 
versions have the spear in plain sight, held in the raised hand of an PRrEeCcIiPpIitTaAtTiIoOnN 
innocuous looking statue for instance, whose arm might pivot down Precipitation relates to the amount of moisture which falls out of 
to stab a victim from above. the sky. Depending on the temperature it can range between rain, 

Purpose: Maiming sleet and snow, with hail falling during storms. The base chance of 
Trigger: Stepping on a pressure plate or moving an object it raining is equal to the relative humidity. The amount of rain per 
Diffwculty: 75% hour and duration of the fall can be calculated by looking up the 
Resistance: Either Evade to dive aside or a Hard parry roll if wielding a relevant entry on the Precipitation table. 
shaeld. Normally precipitation has little effect on characters save to slow 
Effect: The spear inflicts 2d8 damage to a random Hit Location, but can be down travel if excessive rain causes flooding, or snow begins to drift, 
(partially) parried by a shield if its size us sufficient to counteract the spear’s obscuring or blocking paths. Rain also makes characters wet, which 
size of Huge. If the trap gains one or more levels of success over the victim it may increase their chance of suffering exposure if the ambient con- 
can apply Special Effects, such as Impale. ditions are windy or cold. 

TEemMPpEeRrAaTtuURrEe 
VIiSsIiBbIiLlIitTyY Temperate can vary dramatically due to climate, season, and 

The table opposite gives rough distances in metres for the visi- elevation, depending on the campaign world and where scenarios 

bility of man-sized objects, according to the ambient weather and are set. The following table provides a guideline for the effects of 

quality of light. Whilst intended to represent human sight other spe- extreme temperature on characters. 

cies may have more acute vision; the eyesight of an Iqari for instance Wearing suitable local clothing permits a character a grace 

(see page 252) might triple these distances. period of their CON in hours before exposure sets in. After this 

The SIZ of what someone is trying to observe also affects its point they need to seek shelter or start to suffer Fatigue loss (see 

visibility, as will other factors such as obscuring undergrowth, back- Survival page 49). Wet characters shift the Exposure Rate one step 

ground terrain, and possible camouflage. Assume targets with SIZ cooler. Light or moderate gale force winds also shift Exposure Rate 

10 or below halve the range at which they can be spotted, and that by one step cooler, whilst strong gales and storms shift it two steps. 

84



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

WIiNnDd TAaBbLlEe TEemMPpEeRrAaTtUuRrEe TAaBbLlEe 

Movement 
Wind STR Sample Skill Grade Temp oC Climate EI:;Zi;{e Exposure Rate 

Rate 

Calm Day/Light Below -20 Glacial Yes Minutes 
0-15 Standard Normal 

Breeze -19 —-10 Treezing Yes 15 Minutes 

16-30 Moderate Breeze Standard Normal 9-0 Cold Yes Hourly 

31-45 Strong Breeze Standard Two Thirds 1-10 Chill Yes Daily 

46-60 Light Gale Hard Two Thirds 11-20 Cool No None 

61-75 Moderate Gale Hard Half 21-30 Warm No None 

76-90 Strong Gale Formidable Half 31-40 Hot Yes Hourly 

91+ Storm/Hurricane Formidable One Third 

PRrEeCcIiPpIitTaAtTiIoOnN TAaBbLlEe 

R[;il:_z::w Typical Cloud Cover Amount per Hour Duration Dehydration Rate 

0-12 None None None Hourly 

13-25 Scant cloud Very light (0-1mm) 1d10 minutes 2 Hours 

26-37 Scattered cloud Light (1-2.5mm) 1d6 x10 minutes 3 Hours 

38-50 Heavy cloud Moderate (2.5-10mm) 1d2 hours 4 Hours 

51-62 Slightly Overcast Heavy (11-25mm) 1d3 hours 4 Hours 

63-75 Moderately Overcast Very Heavy (26-50mm) 1d6 hours 3 Hours 

76-87 Completely Overcast Monsoon (51-80mm) 1d8 hours 2 Hours 

88-100 Storm Clouds Deluge (81+mm) 1d12 hours Hourly 

WIiNnDd 
Wind, especially very strong winds, can have an adverse effect on 

activity. A wind’s Strength (STR) is expressed in kilometres per hour 
of velocity. Its effect on physical skills — those involving STR or DEX 
—1is detailed in the Skill Grade column; effects on Movement Rate 
in the Movement Rate column (for example, a Light Gale of STR 
50 reduces human walking speed to two thirds or 4 metres; whilst a 
STR 95 Storm reduces it to 2 metres). 

80



