Mythras:  Animism

oy X 2 o % o F WKW MK K EX M T XN 

Animism

oy X 2 o % o F WKW MK K EX M T XN 

nimism is magic worked through communion with spirits the material world so that it seems at once familiar and alien. Spir- 
and the spirit world. It is the magic of shamans and spirit its fill the Spirit World and whirl constantly through it. Also found 

A walkers. Such practitioners do not treat with gods or learn here are the faint souls of mortal beings whose spirits are still bound 
their abilities from books or tomes; instead their powers come from to a material body. These appear as pale shadows, and can some- 
the myriad spirits that inhabit the spirit realms, and interact occa- times be hard to perceive. Many spirits collect in habitats that mirror 
sionally with the mundane world. Shamans are sensitive to their mundane world communities and settlements; others congregate in 
presence, whether these entities are nature spirits, representatives of clearly defined regions that are alien or hellish to human perception. 
particular natural objects, the souls of revered ancestors, or malign Nothing physical can exist there, only the non-corporeal. 
things such as disease and curse spirits. 

Animism relies on forming multiple relationships with many spir- 
STtAaTtEeSs oOFf BEeIinNgG 

its, that themselves embody magical effects which are made available 
A soul or spirit that inhabits a physical thing, be it a living body 

to the shaman. Gathering spirits requires negotiation, sometimes 
or an inanimate object, is defined as being corporeal. A corporeal 

combat, and frequent expeditions into the Spirit World. 
spirit cannot enter the Spirit World until drawn forth from its mate- 
rial residence. 

WHhAaTt ARrEe SPpIiRrIitTSs? Conversely a soul pulled from its physical body into the Spirit 
Spirits are a metaphysical manifestation of a particular aspect World is considered duscorporate. Whilst discorporate, souls are sepa- 

of the cosmos. Most are intrinsically linked with something existing rated from the senses and sensations of their body. 
in the material world that reflects and represents the spirit’s nature The last state of being applies to spirits that naturally reside in 
and influence. A spring in a glade, for instance, may well have a the Spirit World, and lack any tie to a physical body or object. These 
spirit representing its beauty and serenity; a species of animal has are defined as mangfested when they emerge into the mundane world. 
a guardian spirit watching over it, an archetype of all that the spe- 
cies is and does; ghosts, and certain restless spirits of the dead, are 
tied to the place where they died; ancestor spirits are linked to the 
communities they once inhabited. Spirits are non-corporeal, possess TRrAaNnCcEe AanNDd BIinNdDIinNgG 
motivations, perceptions and outlooks very different to those of the Animists learn two magical skills, Trance and Binding. Trance 

material world, and have, through their connections with the Spirit enables the animist to perceive spirits and enter the Spirit World. 

World, developed great powers and abilities. Binding allows animists to summon, dominate, and bind spirits in 
spirit combat. Every animist learns Trance and Binding as part of 
his training, which is always conducted by a shaman or high sha- 

WHhAaTt i1sS tThHEe SPpIiRrIitT WOoRrLlDd?? man. Would-be animists learn which natural features are linked with 
The Spirit World mirrors the mundane world, and resides close a spirit or the Spirit World, and become sensitive to the shifts, and 

to it, intersecting with it in some places, but is otherwise invisible and whorls of the Spirit World as it intersects with the mundane world. 
quite separate. The Spirit World is unfettered by the laws of phys- 
ics, meaning that conditions there can be very different to those of 
the mundane world: time may pass differently or have no meaning; TRraANnCcEe (CCOON+POW)) 
colours may seem more vivid and pronounced. All physical effects in Trance represents the animist’s awareness of the Spirit World, 

the Spirit World are the results of the spirits themselves. As a plane and his ability to move between it and the material world. Anyone 

of existence it is infinite. It has no shape, yet reflects all aspects of with Trance can, on a successful roll, detect, but not observe, the 

130

< 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

TRrAaNnCcEe PRrEePpaARrAaTtIioOnN TIimMEe 
BIinNdDIinNgG (PPOOWW+CHAA)) 

Converse  Project Self 
Observe ’ Binding is the skill used by animists to induce or force a spirit to 

Cult Rank L. With or Draw 
Spirits .. .. perform to his will. It has a range of applications: 

Spirits Spirit 

Tollower 1 Hour - - - « It can bind spirits into fetishes, places or creatures, and con- 

Spirit ] trol their actions once bound. 
i 1 Minute 1 Hour - - 

Worshipper & Tt can be used to persuade a spirit to perform a single deed for 
a mutually acceptable service. 

Shaman 1 Round 1 Minute 1 Hour - 
& It can be used to summon a known spirit from across the 

High Shaman 1 Action 1 Round 1 Minute 1 Hour 
Spirit Plane, provided its corresponding physical location is 
within the skill’s value in kilometres away. 

presence of spirits within a range equal to their POW in metres. The & Tt can be used to engage in Spirit Combat. 

skill i3 capable of far more - but such secrets are jealously guarded The POW of the largest spirit which can be coerced, bound or 
by tribal shamans, and only revealed to those who progress higher in controlled cannot exceed three times the critical range of this skill. 
a spirit cult’s hierarchy (see page 196). Each further level of knowl- Thus a character with a Binding skill of 45% could control spirits 
edge allows the skill to be used in new ways, permitting observation, of up to 15 POW. 
communication, and eventually freedom to travel the Spirit Plane. When used to engage in Spirit Combat, the value of the Binding 

Interacting directly with the Spirit Plane takes time, normally skill is used to calculate the amount of damage inflicted by the ani- 
requiring that a ritual be performed to enter a trance-like state. The mist - see the Spirit Damage Table. The same table is used by spirits 
amount of time required depends on the ability being used (see for their Spectral Combat skill. 
Trance Preparation Timetable), and costs a single Magic Point. 

If the skill check is successtul then the animist can perform the 
SPpIirRIitT DAaMmAaGgEe 

following, dependent on his cult rank: 
Skill Value Damage Inflicted Average Roll 

& Tollower - Can observe and identify spirits within range, using 01-20 1d2 2 

their natural senses. 21-40 1d4 3] 

& Spirit Worshipper - Can converse with spirits within range, 41-60 1d6 4 
via empathic communication. 61-80 1d8 ) 

& Shaman - Can project their own soul onto the Spirit Plane. 
81-100 1d10 6 

They can also draw a spirit into the material world (or expel 
101-120 2d6 7 

a spirit possessing a mortal) for a time equal to their POW in 
121-140 1d8+1d6 8 

minutes. Spirits unwilling to manifest (or depart) may resist 
using their Willpower in an opposed roll against the Trance 141-160 2d8 9 

skill of the Shaman'. 161-180 1d10+1d8 10 

& High Shaman - Can drag the souls of others onto the Spirit 181-200 2d10 11 

Plane with them, at a cost of 1 extra Magic Point per addi- 201-220 2d10+1d2 13 

tional person. Unwilling participants can resist using their 221-240 2d10+1d4 14 
Willpower in an Opposed roll against the Trance skill of the 241-260 2d10+1d6 15 
High Shaman'. 

261-280 2d10+1d8 16 

Shamans and High Shamans may travel the Spirit Plane to 281-300 3d10 17 

observe and locate other spirits. The skill provides an understanding Each +20% Tollow above progression 

of the abstract geography and nature of the region, and the shaman 
can travel up to his skill’s value in kilometres away from his body. 
From the Spirit Plane a shaman who succeeds in a Perception test 
can also distinguish the souls of corporeal creatures in the material SPpIirRIitT SOoCcIEieTtIiEeSs,, 
world, and thus hunt for particular species or even seek out specific 
people. CuuLlts & TRrAaDdIiTtIioOnNSs 

If the roll is a critical success then entering the trance is achieved In cultures where animism is the main form of religion, spirits 

one step more quickly (with a minimum of one Action). If the roll and fetishes are ever present, and a shaman fulfils the same role as a 

is fumbled, the shaman is barred from entering the Spirit Plane for priest. In settings where animism is a core part of belief] spirits are 

a full day. fundamental parts of society, and treated with reverence, respect, 
and fear — not as magical batteries or buffs. Most people will have a 
shrine to revered ancestors or several fetishes holding totem spirits, 
and will take part in ceremonies of remembrance and revitalisation. 

Animists who walk the otherworld binding spirits against their 
will, treating them as accoutrements, will soon gain a poor reputa- 

1 If the unwilling target succeeds in resisting, they cannot be affected by the same Shaman or High 
tion — not only amongst their peers but also amongst spirits friendly 

Shaman again, until a full day has passed. The range of these abilities us the Shamans POW in 
to that culture— and gradually be alienated as a result. 

metres. 

131



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

share one simple insight: the world is alive. Each rock, 
plant, animal, and each cloud, pool and storm has its 
own spirit. 

These spirits, especially the spirits of ancestors, 
might also be members of a tradition or be friendly 
towards it. Others simply have no interest in the mun- 
dane world. Some may even be actively hostile to 
members of a particular tradition. Because there are 
so many ways to approach spirit worship, cults tend to 
be diverse, but as a rule of thumb each spirit tradition 
tends to have: 

& Direct access to 1d3+3 specific types of spirit 
which are friendly to the tradition. 
& Knowledge of how to locate a further 1d3 types 
of spirit that are neutral with regards to the tradition. 
& At least one enemy or competing cult, its own 
allied spirits being treated as actively hostile towards 
the tradition. 

Depending on the setting, most will have access to 
allied medicine, nature and ancestor spirits. These are 
the core spirits upon which a cult can be based, but it 
is not necessary for a cult to possess knowledge of all 
of them. The types of allied spirit can vary with the 
focus of the tradition. 

In settings where animism co-exists with theism or 
sorcery, Guardian spirits become necessary allies or 
neutral spirits to have access to, whereas they are not 
really needed in animism-only settings. 

Elemental spirits of differing Intensities will be 
available to cults having particular affiliations to large 
scale natural phenomena, such as earthquakes or 
floods. Usually (save for some high fantasy or Sword 
& Sorcery settings) curse, death and bane spirits are 

Most animists possess enough skill in Trance to see the spirits not an active part of any particular tradition, and any 

around them when they meditate. It is highly unlikely that they will shaman attempting to bind them into service is taking a serious 

ever engage in a life and death battle in the Spirit World, since that risk. The remaining types of spirit are not commonly worshipped, 

is the shaman role. Thus most lay animists are content to master and tend to be propitiated rather than made into allies, unless the 

enough skill in Binding to learn the proper means of address and campaign requires diabolical spirit cults to act as antagonists for the 

state of mind needed to safely invoke the power of their bound characters. 
Spirits. 

The shaman is the bridge between the mortal world and the 
Spirit World. He lives a life in two realms, and with his help mem- 
bers of the community can pass through to the Spirit World to con- DEeFfIinNIinNgG SPpIiRrIitTSs 
verse with those who have gone before. From omnipresent spirits of nature to the restless spirits of the 

Powerful shamans tend to attract attention in the Spirit World. undead, the inhabitants of the Spirit Plane are varied and diverse: 

When viewed there the shaman’s soul echo is often the subject of but what exactly is a spirit? 

many spirits seeking attention. This can be highly distracting for the Typically a spirit is an intangible entity lacking any physical sub- 

shaman, and may attract the attention of predators; but a powerful stance. At their simplest they are magical fragments of life-force 

shaman should have a strong enough web of allies that most hunters cycling between the material world, and the mythic or metaphysical 

would rather stalk less powerful prey. However, player character sha- sources of the universe. 

mans should expect occasional very unpleasant surprises. Spirits are generally aware of their surroundings and capable of 

Although most spirit worshippers will be a member of a cult or reacting to circumstances. Those with plant and animal sentience 

tradition, the organisation is unlikely to be anywhere near as formal use their base empathic drives, such as love, hunger or fear, to com- 

as a theistic cult or mysticism order. Spirit cults tend to be loose municate. Sapient spirits are fully intelligent, capable of far more 

affiliations of animists or may simply consist of members of single subtle communication approaching that of true language. 

family, clan or race who venerate particular spirits. These traditions Souls are spirits that remain tied to a living, physical body in the 
material world. This isolates them from the Spirit World, denying 

132



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

them the primordial state that they should occupy. The only ways To create a spirit that originates in the Spirit World, decide on 
for a soul to transcend to the Spirit World are: its Intensity then roll POW as defined by the Spirit Intensity table 

(1d6+18, for instance, for an Intensity 3 spirit). 
& Through death, sundering the physical and spiritual, liberat- 

The lowest Intensity spirits are by far the most prevalent, but 
ing the soul to attain its next stage of existence. 

offer the least amount of benefit. A spirit with an Intensity of zero 
& Being made discorporate through the actions of another 

cannot affect the material world in any noticeable manner. Intensity 
spirit. 

6 (and greater) spirits are stretching beyond the control of a lone 
& Using the Trance skill to temporarily free the soul. 

animist, but may still be summoned, bargained with or even bound 

The nature of a spirit depends on its source and purpose. An by several practitioners working together. 

animal spirit roams the Spirit Plane in similar places to its physical 
SPpIirRIitT InNtTEeNnSsIitTyY 

counterparts. They are attracted by their kin, and drawn to con- 
ceived young within which they incarnate as souls, moving to the Intensity pPOW POW Range 

material world through the miracle of physical birth. When they 0 1d6 1-6 

eventually die they return to the Spirit World, only to be recycled 1 1d6+6 7-12 

once again. 2 1d6+12 13-18 

Other types of spirit serve different purposes, and their powers 3 1d6+18 19-24 

have a resonance affecting the mundane world. For example ele- 
4 1d6+24 25-30 

mental spirits drive the natural phenomenon of the material world 
5 1d6+30 31-36 

via their actions on the Spirit World, having a cosmic emanation 
+1 +6 +6 

that transcends the metaphysical barriers. An angered hurricane 
spirit tears through the Spirit World, and its anger is felt as mon- 
strous winds on the material world. A restless earth spirit causes the CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCcSs 
ground to shake through earthquakes and rock slides. Spirits also possess two other characteristics: either INT or INS 

Certain malevolent spirits bring sickness or death. A plague spir- (Instinct — see the Creatures chapter), and CHA. 

it’s contagion spreads to the physical world where disease affects INT/INS This reflects their level of intellect when alive or the 

many. A curse spirit’s malignance lingers across the mundane world, corresponding physical creature if one exists. 

bringing misfortune to those touched by it. CHA reflects the force of the spirit’s personality in very much 

Ancestor spirits are the souls of particularly powerful and revered the same way as for player characters. CHA varies widely according 
individuals that retain their identity after death to guard their com- to the nature and type of the spirit; more detail is provided in the 

munities and faithful. Communing with the ancestors can yield descriptions of specific spirits starting on page 145. 

advice, guidance, and secrets that provide aid in the mundane world. 
Then there are the restless dead: spirits that remain tied to the ATtTtRrIibBUuTtEeSs 

physical world, unable or unwilling to pass fully into the spirit realm 
Lacking a physical body, the attributes of a spirit or discorpo- 

to be reincarnated in the great circle of being. Natural, peaceful 
rated soul are calculated using different Characteristics to corporeal 

death results in the soul passing between the worlds easily, and with 
creatures. Spirit Attributes are reckoned in the following way: 

grace. Violent, unwarranted death can inhibit the transition, caus- 
ing the soul to linger in a limbo state between the corporeal and ACcTtIioOnN POoIiNnTtSs 
discorporate. Ghosts and other restless spirits yearn for the transition Calculate using the sum of INT and POW (see Action Points 
to the Spirit World but have been denied it: in this state they become table page 8). 
obsessive, aggressive, selfish entities that can bring pain and torment 
to the living — even though all they seek is the peace that the natural InNIitTiIaAtTIivVeE BOoNnUuSs 
order of the cosmos dictates should be theirs. Figure using the average of INT and CHA. 

PIRIT NTENSITY MaAaggGic PoIiNnTts 
Spirit Intensity

Calculated as normal, but are used by spirits and souls as their 
All spirits have an Intensity. Intensity is based on a spirit’s POW, 

Hit Points. A spirit’s Magic Points do not recover whilst bound to a 
and measures three things: 

fetish or location, nor when summoned to the physical world; they 

& The benefit it can give to the spirit’s controller. only begin to heal on return to the Spirit Plane. (Also see the alter- 

& How difficult the spirit is to bind and control. native concept of Tenacity on page 139) 

& The spirit’s ability to influence the material world. 
SPpIirIitT DAaMmAaGgEe 

The greater a spirit’s POW, the greater its Intensity. The Spirit Based upon the value of a spirit’s Spectral Combat skill or a 
Intensity table can be used in a number of ways to determine this soul’s Binding skill: see the Spirit Damage Table on page 131. If 
relationship. a discorporated character lacks Binding, they use half the value of 

To determine the Intensity of] say, a recently deceased creature, their Willpower on the table instead. 
cross reference its POW range from life with its Intensity; most 
player characters, when they die, will produce Intensity 1 or 2 spir- 
its, for example. 

133



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

would travel to a burial or execution ground, knowing that here the 
ATtTtIitTuUdDEe 

links to the Spirit World where such spirits lurk are strongest. 
Each spirit has an attitude towards animists who approach it: 

Of course not all animists need to travel blindly through remote 
friendly, neutral or hostile. A spirit’s attitude affects how it will react 

wilderness locations to find a specific type of spirit. A guardian of 
to being contacted, to being bound, and what it might do if it ever 

a necropolis might, for example, have immediate access to many 
escapes a binding. 

ancestor spirits whilst the Spirit Tradition of a nomadic clan may 
Spirits that belong to the animist’s tradition will most likely be 

maintain cult knowledge of a dozen secret locations where certain 
friendly to the practitioner, and willing to ally with them. A bear 

spirits gather (See Spirit Cults page 193). 
spirit, for example, if being bound by a shaman of the Great Bear 

Locating a spirit normally requires an animist to either: 
Clan, would be friendly towards an approaching shaman; neutral 
at worst. & Scour the mundane world, using Trance to view the Spirit 

Neutral spirits consist of both those that belong to traditions Plane, on the off chance of noticing a suitable specimen. 
which are not hostile towards the shaman, and those not considered & Shift fully into the Spirit World to search for a specific spirit. 
part of any tradition. & Journey to a location known to his tradition, where particular 

Hostile spirits belong to enemy traditions or are inherently antag- spirits are reputed to reside. 
onistic due to their nature. Ior example a tradition with wolf spir- & Have someone of greater skill, rank or knowledge summon a 
its will find that most prey animal spirits are distinctly hostile to it. known spirit for the animist. 
Whilst water spirits and fire spirits are immediately hostile towards 

Spirits might be relatively easy to locate: knowing how to control 
each other. 

one is an entirely different matter. Each spirit has its own idiosyncra- 
sies regarding how it can be found, propitiated or bound. Shamanic 
cults and spirit traditions possess fragments of this lore, which can 

LoOCcAaTtIinNgG AanNDd influence their skill regarding particular spirit types. For example, 
the shamans of the Great Bear Clan know that the spirit of the 

GAaIiNnIinNgG SPpIiRrIitTSs Great Bear should never be approached during the winter when all 

In the Spirit World spirits can be found inhabiting objects or bear spirits hibernate. They also know that the best place to encoun- 

locations relevant to their originating power; subterranean caves for ter Grandfather Bear, when he is at his least aggressive, is after mak- 

darkness spirits, forests for plant spirits, and so on. Remote places ing a sacrifice of favoured prey — such as a large salmon caught fresh 
are generally favoured because there is diminished interference from from the water. 
other, more disturbing sources of magic. In the case of more tran- Once located, animists may approach spirits in two ways: 

sient spirits the locale can shift. Lesser herd beast spirits are found 
& Negotiation: looking to strike a bargain, in return for a sin- 

following the great migrations for example, with more powerful ones 
gular service. 

found instead at mythic Death Grounds where the greatest beasts 
& Binding: seeking to bind the spirit into continued service. 

go to die. Frequently the location is a place of striking or beautiful 
appearance. 

Ancestor spirits typically live in communities mirroring their 
SPpIirRIitT NEeGgOoTtIiAaTtIioOnN 

corporeal homes, or may have made for themselves a new home, 
Animists will make contact with many spirits over time, some 

such as a Feasting Hall, Medicine Lodge or Spirit Manse. Indeed all 
of their own tradition, others not. Rather than binding them all to 

ancestor spirits may be found in one location but with clear delinea- 
service as fetishes, most animists attempt to strike bargains — pro- 

tions between old culture and origins. 
viding something the spirit wants in return for a singular service for 

As the mundane and Spirit worlds intersect, animists who want 
the animist. 

swiftly to access the Spirit World location for a particular kind of 
In negotiation, the spirit must be willing to bargain, and be either 

spirit, travel to the real-world equivalents of the spirit abode. A sha- 
friendly or neutral towards the animist. If remaining in the mate- 

man wanting to contact the Great Bear spirit would travel deep into 
rial world this requires the animist to successfully enter a detached 

the woods and find the hunting trails and territories of mundane 
reverie using his Trance skill, and possess the ability to communi- 

bears. A High Shaman seeking to locate and bind a death spirit 
cate with the spirit, in line with a cult rank of Spirit Worshipper or 
higher. Alternatively the animist can ask a shaman or High Shaman 
to manifest the spirit in question. 

SPpIirRIitT REeLlAaTtIioONnSsHhIiPpSs 
Once communication has been established, the animist may then 

Over the course of a campaign, some spurit allies may be willing to 
request the spirit’s aid to perform a single task in return for per- 

undertake tasksfor the animist or evenf ightf or kim by attacking an enemy 
forming a like service for the spirit. Some spirits are willing to enter 

in spurit combat. Thus kind of independent behaviour should be the result 
into a more formal arrangement by providing the animist with their 

of mutual respect or perhaps a debt of gratitude, but must be something 
name, becoming an ally. In response the animist agrees to undertake 

that unfolds over time in play. The possibility exusts that a friendship may 
some sort of repeating task or accept some form of geas or compul- 

grow between a amimast, and an allied spirit, in which case the Games 
sion in line with the spirit’s nature. On the most abstract level it can 

Master should feel free to use the spirit as the animast’s future fetch (if 
assumed that the task will cost the animist a number of Experience 

suitable for the setting) or as a_fully fledged non-player character to con- 
Rolls equal to the spirit’s Intensity per year to complete the service 

tnue the relationsthup. 
or suffer the inconvenience. 

N 4 

134



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

Such bargains can be settled by decision of the Games Master, or 
resolved with an Opposed Test of suitable skills, such as the suppli- SEeTtTtIinNgGSs WwIitThHoOUuTt SPpIiRrIitTSs 
cant’s Influence skill versus the spirit’s Willpower. Failure to reach an 1In somef antasy settings magicians are able to travel the ethereal planes 

accord has no further effect. Fumbling the roll however, may cause in spiritform, yet encounter no ecology of spurits other than the souls of 

the spirit to react with anger. other Animism practitioners. This need not be a kandrance, since sprrits 
are not strictly necessary for an accomplished spiritualist who has mas- 
lered the necessary skills. 

SPpIiRrIitT BIinNdDIinNgG For example, a practitioner can stull use the Trance skill to pass mes- 
Binding a spirit always requires the animist to engage the spirit sages over great distances, provide warnings to dreaming mortals, and act 

directly in Spirit Combat. If he is able to compel a bargain (see page as a very effective spy or scout. Similarly the Binding skill can be used 
138) or lower the spirit to zero Magic Points, and its POW does not lo combat opposing psychics, possess the physical bodies of others, and 
exceed the limit set by his Binding skill, the animist may then bind it perhaps even killfrom afar. 
into a fetish, a location, or a creature; each type of binding necessi- Thus a magician or psychic should never be underestimated just 
tating its own requirements in terms of use and vulnerability, often because they lack a comprehensive collection of bound spirits. The utility 
in the form of taboos. of their skalls us limated only by the imagination of the player. 

 FEeTtIisShH  BIinNDdIinNGgSs 
A fetish is a ceremonial object that embodies magical power. Any non-aggravation from otherwise harmless activities like dancing, or 

item can become a fetish for a spirit, but amongst primitive cultures, the establishment of regular propitiatory sacrifice to placate it. 
fetishes tend to be items made from an item associated with that Only the binder, or the cult he belongs to may exert command 
spirit (a bear’s claw or tooth, for example, or its hide). a location-bound spirit. If two or more animists of that cult vie for 

Whilst confined within its fetish a spirit cannot be harmed by control over the spirit, it is resolved similarly to struggles over a fetish. 
hostile magic or other spirits; it remains in stasis, unaware of its sur- 
roundings. For an animist to use its magical ability a bound spirit CRrEeAaTtUuRrEe BIinNDdIinNGgSs 
must first be called from the fetish, to serve the holder. The binding Spirits can also be bound into the body of a living creature. In 
still exists, but the spirit is now able to exert its power and travel up principle the creature is loyal to whoever bound it, or the person 
to its POW in metres away from the fetish. they have assigned it to. 

Over time any animist possessing a fetish takes on some of the Advantages are that the spirit may recover Magic Points natu- 
spirit’s essence. So the owner of a bear tooth holding a bear spirit rally, can move freely as allowed by its body and gains immunity 
may feel dozy in winter or take on bearish odour. Fetishes holding from direct magical assault (as per a fetish). 
curse or sickness spirits may emit a miasma that induces minor Drawbacks are that it is now vulnerable to physical damage; the 
symptoms in the holder, making the fetish extremely unpleasant. spirit’s abilities only affect the body it is bound to; the creature must 
Conversely a stone holding a Fire spirit would be warm to the touch be tattooed or branded with the spirit’s binding; and most dubitable 
- which may occasionally be useful. of all — unlike Possession — the creature’s original soul must be per- 

Since the spirit of a fetish only submits to the control of who- manently sundered from its body, in effect killing it to make space 
ever is holding the object, animists closely, and jealously guard their for the new spirit. 
fetishes. It is usually taboo to touch an animist’s fetish without his Totemists are avid practitioners of creating such living fetishes, 
permission, and those who try risk the animist’s ire. placing spirits into the bodies of their totem animals who then act as 

In certain circumstances two or more animists might end up animal companions. 
struggling for physical control over a fetish, and by inference the Some spirits with the Animate ability can be bound into corpses. 
spirit bound to it. In these cases both should roll their Binding skill as In such cases the bound spirit cannot regain Magic Points. 
an Opposed test, the winner gaining command over the spirit until 
challenged again. 

LoOCcAaTtIioOnN BIinNDdIinNGgSs FEeTtIisShH PRrOoLlIifFeErRaAtTiIoOnN 
A spirit can also be bound to a specific location. This is usually In most cultures a Shaman s a combination of preest, doctor; teackher, 

done to protect an area. Unlike a fetish the spirit is able to roam the lawyer; undertaker; and spiritual border guardf or their community. Most 

area specified by the anamist when it was bound, but no further than of thewr efforts are taken up with mundane affairs, and they have very little 

ten times the spirit’s POW in metres from the exact spot the binding time_for the exertion requiredfor creating extraneous fetishes. Communaty 

occurred. members might gain a fetish as an adulthood ritual, and maybe others afler 

Within this region the spirit is both visible and vulnerable to signifwant rites-of-passage. 

direct magical assault, unless it has the Manifestation ability to travel The number of fetishes prevalent in a community depends on many 

back and forth from the Spirit Plane (although it will still be trapped Jactors such as whether lower ranked members of the cult are permatted 

in the binding area). In return the spirit may use its powers, and lo own fetishes, if fetishes are reserved for those of a particular sex or 
freely interact with anyone within the location. profession, and whether the tradition has existed so long that previously 

Often hostile spirits are bound to locations instead of fetishes, createdf etishes are handed down as heirlooms within famalies. In general, 

imprisoning them so they cannot cause harm. In such cases the bind- shamans have more important things to do than provide magic items_for 

ing taboo is usually linked to oaths of not trespassing into the area, wandering characters. 

N\ 3 

135



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

CRrEeAaTtIinNgG aA BIinNdDIinNgG 
The creation of a binding costs one Experience Roll per point USsIinNgG SPpIiRrIitTSs 

of Intensity of the spirit. This represents the time and development Aspirit’s magical effects are persistent, lasting until it is sent away, 

needed to prepare the item, location or creature in which the spirit countermanded or recalled to a fetish. This can make animists for- 

will be held. The ritual usually takes one week, at the end of which midable foes. However, manifested spirits are vulnerable to magic 

the animist should roll the spirit’s Characteristics randomly, based that specifically targets spiritual entities. If so dismissed or destroyed, 

on its Intensity. It is always possible that the spirit gained may be too the spirit is gone for good until a replacement can be summoned. 

powerful for the animist to control. Animists generally use their spirits in one of two ways: call upon 

An animist can attempt to improve the binding’s potency to con- a materially bound spirit, or summon a spirit from afar to perform 

tain a more powerful spirit of the same type by paying the differ- an agreed task. These two different uses have different methods of 

ence in Experience Rolls. Thus an animist with a fetish capable of resolution. 

containing an Intensity 2 Animal Spirit could upgrade it to hold 
an Intensity 3 Animal Spirit by paying one Experience Roll. The CAaLlLlIinNgG UPpOoNn aA BIinNdDIinNgG 
animist can also replace the spirit of a fetish with one of the same Depending on its attitude a bound spirit will see its binding as 
type of the same Intensity, at no additional cost in Experience Rolls, either a prison or a positive relationship with its owner. Hostile 
provided the spirit can be found or a shaman persuaded to do the spirits are always seeking to hinder or undermine whoever dared 
finding. to command it; friendly spirits are sanguine and obeisant. Neutral 

The recipient of a fetish or creature binding does not need to spirits have little care either way. How the spirit behaves when called 
have bound the spirit himself. Lower ranking worshippers of a spirit upon is thus dependent on its attitude. 
cult often gain spirits through undertaking a ritual in collaboration Commanding a bound spirit takes an Action, costs 1 Magic 
with a shaman who binds it for them. While the shaman searches, Point, and requires a Binding skill roll. Depending on the result of 
the supplicant fasts and meditates, or sings and dances, purifying the roll the following occurs: 
himself in preparation for the gift of the spirit. The bound spirit 
counts against the supplicant’s limit, not the shaman’s. & Critical Success: The command is not only successful, but 

Animists of less than Shaman rank are not prevented from costs the animist no Magic Points. 

undertaking the search and binding a spirit personally, save that such & Success: The spirit is commanded successfully, and performs 

tasks are sometimes dangerous, and would be frowned on by peers the deed requested of it. 

of the community if, for instance, the attempt ended with a mali- & Failure: The spirit ignores the command. The animist must 

cious spirit possessing the would-be fetish maker. wait until his next Turn to try again. 

Shamans usually only provide spirits to members of the same & Fumble: The command is so badly botched the binding is 

tradition or in recompense for great favours. Even then shamans broken, allowing the spirit to return to the Spirit Plane or to 

will usually only bind friendly spirits associated with their cult in turn on the animist if hostile. 

this manner. Seeking out spirits of a disparate or contrary nature is 
A spirit that escapes the authority of the animist, can act freely 

dangerous for both the shaman and the supplicant. 
until it is compelled to obey. 

Physically destroying a binding, by killing the host creature or 
While under control a spirit performs its instruction to the best 

shattering its fetish for instance, immediately unbinds the spirit it 
of its abilities, yet if the animist wishes it to perform a different task, 

contains. Upon gaining its freedom a spirit can either return to the 
he must issue a new command with the requisite Magic Point cost 

Spirit World or, if hostile, possibly attempt to attack the animist who 
and Binding skill roll. There is always the possibility of losing control 

imprisoned it. Malicious shamans sometimes booby-trap places with 
of a spirit and, the more powerful a spirit is, the more dangerous it 

easily broken fetishes containing dangerous spirits. 
is likely to be. 

A spirit can be voluntarily unbound from its binding by its owner. 
If the spirit’s POW is greater than the limit set by the user’s Bind- 

Many reasons exist to do this, such as wishing to replace the spirit 
ing skill, any attempt to command it fails. 

with a less damaged version. Owners can only manumit a spirit from 
In the specific case of a fetish, the bound spirit emerges from 

its bondage if their Binding skill is capable of handling the POW of 
its binding-object as a Iree Action to perform the first command 

the shackled spirit. 
given it. Returning the spirit to the fetish costs the animist an Action 
Point on their Turn, but no further Magic Points. Only if the spirit 
is neutral or hostile to the animist is a Binding skill check required 

LimiiTts tToO BoOUuNnDd SPpIiRrIitTSs to succeed. 
The maximum number of spirits an animist can hold in bondage 

depends on cult rank: 
SuUmMMmOoNnIiNnGg aA SPpIiRrIitT 

« Follower: s of CHA Animists can summon spirits they have successfully negotiated 

& Spirit Worshipper: half of CHA with previously or know the true name of - the latter something 

& Shaman: ¥s of CHA which is normally held secret by members of the animist’s cult or 

& High Shaman: All CHA tradition. 
To conjure the spirit the animist uses his Trance skill to make 

If this number is ever exceeded, then the strongest spirit or spirits contact with the Spirit World (though he need not enter it). Assum- 
break free, possibly extracting revenge if they were hostile to the ing the spirit is within range, the animist may then issue a summons. 
binding. Neutral spirits may be simply mischievous. 

136



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

ATtTtIitTuUdDEe oOFf aA SuUmMMmOoNnEeDd SPpIirRIitT replaying of a painful memory from the opponent’s past life, or 
forcing them to confront and overcome a hidden phobia. A combat 

Binding 

Test Allied Spirit Neutral Spirit  Hostile Spirit might even be a light-hearted contest: riddling perhaps, or boastful 
attempts at one-upmanship and humiliation. The outcome though, 

Animist wins Spirit repeatedly Spirit serves once Spirit serves 
is usually serious. 

serves the animist for grudgingly, 
Generally only spirits and animists initiate Spirit Combat, as 

the remainder of the and attempts 

scenario to pervert the characters without the Binding skill lack knowledge of how to fight 

command in this way. 

Spirit wins Spirit serves once Spirit departs Spirit turns on 

then departs in the animist EnNGgAaGgIinNGg iInN SPpIiRrIitT COoMmBbAaTt 
friendship Spirit Combat works almost identically to normal combat save 

that mortal combatants (if present in the Spirit World) use their 
The summoning attempt costs the animist a number of Magic 

Spirit Attributes, rather than physical attributes, as described earlier 
Points equal to the spirit’s Intensity, and requires a Binding test: 

in this chapter. 

& Critical Success: The spirit anticipates its summons, arriving Rather than wielding weapons, spirits have a Spectral Combat 

in 1d3 rounds. skill to make psychic attacks and parries. Animists use their Binding 

& Success: The spirit hears the summons, and arrives in 1d6 skill, whereas those uninitiated in Animism must rely on their Will- 

minutes. power skill instead. 

& Failure: The spirit fails to notice the call. The animist may try As with physical combat, each attack and parry exchange in 

again the following day. Spirit Combat is treated as a Differential Roll. If one or more levels 

& Fumble: The spirit is mortally offended by the manner of the of success are achieved then Spirit Combat Special Effects may be 

summons. The bond between the summoner, and the spirit is selected (sce table). 

suspended until the animist can offer amends for his affront. In addition, a successful attack which is not parried, inflicts an 
amount of damage equal to the attacker’s Spirit Damage roll to the 

What happens then depends on the spirit’s attitude towards its defender’s Magic Points. (For settings with no natural Magic Points 
summoner, and whether it owes the animist a service. To determine see Tenacity, page 139) 
how helpful or malicious it is, the spirit makes an opposed test of its If the defender runs out of Action Points with which to defend 
Willpower against the animist’s summoning roll. Refer the result on themselves, then they are left wide open, and the attacker may 
the Attitude of a Summoned Spirit table. attempt to make an unopposed attack roll. Corporal characters 

Note that if the POW of the spirit is beyond the capability of the engaged in Spirit Combat in the physical world may forgo their 
animist to control, it may act independently or place its own inter- attack in order to cast magic or perform a physical act instead. 
pretation on a service demanded of it. Fleeing Spirit Combat is not always possible. If the fight occurs 

in the material world, characters obviously cannot escape unless they 
OBbSsEeRrVvIinNgG MAaNnIFifEeSsTtEedD SPpIiRrIitTSs physically depart the area the spirit occupies. On the Spirit Plane 

In the Spirit World spirits are imperceptible to any corporeal however, a discorporated animist can, instead of trying to damage 
creature, save for those with the Trance skill or some other such their opponent, declare that they are using a Combat Action to try 
ability such as a mystic’s Spirit Sense trait. However, spirits brought and escape back to their body. An Opposed test of the animist’s 
into the material world are manifested, potentially allowing them to Trace skill against the spirit’s Spectral Combat is required. If the 
become detectable by natural means. animist wins they break free, and the combat ends, but if the spirit 

Spirits can manifest in a number of ways. Normally spirits which wins then the animist fails to get away. It is impossible for souls who 
augment the animist form a ghostly shape, whirling intangibly as do not have the Trance skill to consciously escape from the Spirit 
an aura about the summoner. Embodied spirits infest, and actually World as they have no knowledge or understanding of how to move 
modify the animist’s physique, whereas a possessing spirit lurks ethe- within it. Only if they defeat or drive off their attacker will they be 
really within the mortal shell of the animist. How perceivable the freed from its discorporation. Otherwise they must be rescued by 
spirit is depends greatly upon the setting. an animist. 

Combat continues until the fight is concluded by use of a Special 
Effect, or one of the combatants is reduced to zero Magic Points, at 

SPpIirRIitT COoMmBbAaTt which point they are defeated. 

Since most spirits are intangible, conflict must be resolved by 
other means than the clash of weapons. 

Spirit Combat in the mortal realm usually takes the appearance 
of ghostly shapes swarming the body of their transfixed victim. 
Nothing stops the mortal from physically responding if they desire, 
save for futility if they lack magic to affect the spirit assaulting them. 

Within the Spirit World however, such combats can be com- 
pletely abstract in both the challenge presented, and in the appear- 
ance of the participants and their surroundings: it does not need 
to resemble a conventional fight. Instead an attack could be the 

137



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

SPpIirRIitT COoMmBbAaTt SPpEeCcIiaALl EFfFfEeCcTtSs 

Special Effect Offensive Defensive Specific Roll Description 

Bleed Essence X X Critical Only Inflict a psychic wound which leaks 1 Magic Point per cycle, until Spirit Combat ends 

Attacker makes an opposed roll of their Influence against the Defender's Willpower. If 
Compel Bargain X 

successful combat ends, and they force the defender to perform a deed 

Drive Off X Mortals Only Spirit must resist attack roll with Willpower or depart the combat 

Leech Strength X Ciritical Only Attacker absorbs the Magic Points inflicted by the attack 

Obscure X Critical Only Attacker can no longer perceive the defender, unless attacked again 

Assuming spirit is capable of possession, the defender must resist its attack roll with their 
Possess X Spirits Only 

Willpower or become possessed 

Psychic Stun X X Opponent loses next Turn 

Restrain X X Mortals Only Prevents the spirit from fleeing or engaging others in Spirit Combat 

Spirit Lance X Roll Spirit Damage twice, and take the best result 

Sunder Binding X X Spirit Fumbles Breaks the fetish or binding the spirit came from 

Suppress Ability X X Mortals Only Shuts down one of the spirit's abilities currently in use 

Turn Back X Attacker suffers its own Spirit Damage roll instead of the defender 

The defender may automatically disengage from Spirit Combat, returning to their body 
Withdraw X 

(if mortal), fetish or the Spirit Plane (if a summoned spirit) 

COoNnSsEeQqUuEeNnCcEeSs oOFf DEeFfEeAaTt Note that some of the above consequences can only be chosen 

If a participant in Spirit Combat reaches zero Magic Points they by spirits capable of that action. Animists, however, are taught the 

are reduced to a helpless state. Several things may then happen: necessary skills to be able to freely choose any of the consequences 
known to their cult. 

& Possessed: Certain spirits may possess the loser’s body, to Defeat does not inevitably need to result in something bad. Many 
inflict their malignance. (see Possession and Exorcism page Spirit Combats are not antagonistic at all, but rather a test of an ani- 
140). mist’s strength or the abstract representation of a negotiation where 

& Bound: If the loser is a spirit it may be bound into a fetish, the spirit and animist are debating with empathic images and mem- 
location or creature binding. ory. Winning such a challenge sways the loser to regard the victor 

& Exorcised: If the loser is a spirit currently possessing a mortal, with respect, perhaps even capitulating a passionately debated issue. 
then it can be exorcised from the body of the victim, and Even if the Spirit Combat was violent the winner may not want 
forced to return to the Spirit World. to inflict any additional revenge: much depends on the type of spirit 

& Dissipated: Spirits with the Deadly ability (page 143) may to begin with. A peaceful mountain spirit may simply cast a foolish 
destroy the loser by tearing their essence apart. If the dis- animist back to the material world; a predator spirit may inflict a 
sipated spirit was a discorporated mortal, then the physical ritual scar that manifests on the loser’s material body, showing that 
body dies with the destruction of its soul. Some spirits can 
recover from being dissipated if they have the Recurring trait. ThHEe REeCcUuRrRrIinNgG TRrAaIiTt 

& Obligation: In exchange for its freedom, the loser must grant Normally spirits dissipated as a consequence of losing Spirit Combat 
one service to the victor. This is one of the more common are_forever destroyed, their essence recycling into the fabric of the Spurit 
outcomes of a combat, and forms the basis for animists com- Plane. Spirits possessing the Recurring trait are not eradicated. Although 
pelling spirits to do their bidding. ripped asunder their individual elements gradually reform, eventually 

& Expelled: If the loser is a discorporated soul, he may be restoring the original spirit no matter what 1s done lo it. 
ejected from the Spirit World. Such an involved process takes time. A dissipated spirit requires a 

& Ignored: If the loser poses no threat or interest to the victor, number of days equal to its Intensity to reform, plus whatever time s 
he may simply be ignored. Quite often a victorious spirit has required to recurperate its Magic Points. although in some settings the 
no ability to do anything else to a defeated opponent. period can ofien be longer. 

& Sundered: Limited to spirits with the Deadly ability (page Restored spirits retain their former knowledge, skills, and memory. 
143) such as death spirits. If the loser is a discorporated soul, T s often leads to them seeking revenge for their previous destruction — a 
he may be torn completely free of his material form, nor- dangerous situation for any amimist. The only ways to deal with such 
mally causing the death of the body but transfiguring the soul a spirit are to either imprison it in a_fetish where it can no longer cause 
into a spirit. What then happens to the sundered soul depends harm, or discover why it keeps recurring. Thus s normally due to some 
on the victorious spirit, and it may become one of its thralls enchantment or an unfinished task that must be completed before the spirit 
— perhaps exiled to the mundane world to bring fear to other will rest. 
mortals, or retained as a slave in the Spirit World. 

- 4 

138



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

he was bested; a curse spirit will likely be driven to possessing those it 
defeats; and a disease spirit is likely to infect the victim. Games Mas- 
ters must adjudicate the circumstances and repercussions according 
to the spirit’s inherent nature. 

MuuLTltiiPpLlEe OPpPpOoNnEeNnTtSs VvEeRrSsuUSs aA SIinNgGLlEe SPpIiRrIitT 
In certain circumstances a Spirit Combat might ensue where one 

side has a numerical advantage over the other. This may be a group 
of discorporated mortals facing a single spirit of high Intensity. Con- 
versely it could be an animist ambushed by multiple spirits of minor 
power. 

Whilst single combats between disproportionate foes may pose 
little threat to the more skilful practitioner, the situation can change 
if several lesser opponents gang up on a more powerful individual. 
The normal result of such a one-sided engagement is that the more 
numerous side is able to launch a number of unopposed attacks, 
which will begin to whittle down the overwhelmed defender. 

Attempting to flee multiple opponents requires that an ani- 
mist’s Opposed disengagement roll beats all of his foes, otherwise 
he remains trapped by their numbers. Conversely, if a member of 
the attacking pack decides to flee, then they get away automatically, 
provided at least one associate remains behind to cover their retreat. 

SPpIirrRiItT COoMmBbAaTt OPpTtIioONnSs 
Using Magic Points as spiritual Hit Points is the default method 

of measuring damage during Spirit Combat: it poses considerable 
problems if attacked victims have no magical reserves to prevent 
Spirit Combat, lessen its effects, or preserve/recover Magic Points 
quickly. In such situations any spirit or shaman could become by casting magic. Tenacity is independent of magical effort, provid- 
unstoppable. ing them with a level playing field when placed beside iron willed 

To overcome these circumstances, two alternate methods of run- warrior types. 
ning Spirit Combat are provided below. Modifying Spirit Combat to use Tenacity is a simple case of add- 

ing this as a new attribute to complement Magic Points. Tenacity 
TEeNnAaCcIiTtYy Points lost in Spirit Combat recover every 24 hours, provided the 

As well as storing or producing Magic Points, which are used character is sufficiently well rested on their native plane of existence. 
in the mundane world to fuel magic, POW also creates Tenacity 
Points, which measure a character’s resilience when in the Spirit PHhYySsIicCaALl DAaMmAaGgEe 
World. Tenacity Points are the focus of Spirit Damage, preserving Appropriate for nearly all Sword & Sorcery genres, this option is 
Magic Points solely for the use of magic, and ensuring that magi- the perfect replacement for personal Magic Points in worlds where 
cians defeated in Spirit Combat are stll capable of maintaining magic and violent sacrifice is rife. Nonetheless, it is best suited for 
their earthly magical powers afterwards. campaigns where Spirit Combat is only used to harm and destroy, 

Tenacity Points cannot be used to cast magic. They are only rather than for abstract challenges. 
tracked to judge the psychological endurance of those engaging in To avoid the difficulties that corporeal beings face in settings 
Spirit Combat. When reduced to zero the will to resist is broken, where they have no normal access to Magic Points, any damage they 
leaving the loser unable to avoid the consequences of the defeat. take in Spirit Combat is applied to their physical Hit Points instead 

Adding Tenacity Points has the advantage that all magicians, be of their soul. This approach has several distinctions. 
they theists, mystics or sorcerers, do not become spiritually weakened 

& Spirits can keep Magic Points as Hit Points since they lack a 
corporeal form. 

MEeNnTtAaLl REeSsIiLliIeEnNcCEe 
& All corporeal beings can take about the same amount of 

Tenacily has the additional benefit of becoming a_flexible measure of 
damage, regardless whether they are magic users or not. 

other mental states. If the campaign s of a kind where supernatural, and 
& Tnjuries suffered during Spirit Combat become more visceral 

alien horrors are capable of shredding thefrail sanaty of humanaty, Tenac- 
since damage is applied to locations. Although animists gain 

ity can be used lo track deteriorating mental states, with zero Tenacily 
an increase in effective ‘spiritual’ Hit Points, in fact characters 

points reflecting serious psychological damage, and the decline into insanity. 
become increasingly vulnerable to spiritual beings with large 

Simalarly Tenacity could be usedf or resisting corruption, experiencing 
Spirit Damage. 

battlefatigue, suffering addictions, facing supernaturalf orces in historical 
& To offset location vulnerability, Animists and sapient spir- 

settings, and so_forth. 
its possessing knowledge of armour can manifest psychic 

- 4 

139



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

protection with a value of one Armour Point per 20% of the 
Trance skill. 

Since spirit damage is applied directly to locational Hit Points, 
Serious and Major Wounds have duplicate physiological effects on 
an animist. On the Spirit Plane however, a serious wound prevents 
the victim from attacking for his next 1d3 Turns, whilst a major 
wound incapacitates, so that he immediately loses the Spirit Combat. 

Note that an animist can physically be killed by this type of com- 
bat even though something else might be happening to his soul. 

POossSsSeEsSsSiIoOnN aAnNDd EXxOoRrCcIisSmM 
Possession occurs when a spirit dominates the soul of a corporeal 

being, usually through a Spirit Combat defeat or the Possess Special 
Effect. The possessing entity inhabits the loser’s body, perhaps seiz- 
ing control of it. Possession comes in three forms: Dominant, Passive 

and Covert. 
A possessing spirit weaves itself into the victim, so that even if itis 

drawn forth to engage in spirit combat, part of it remains anchored 
to the host. No creature can ever purge itself of a possessing entity. 
Others must first defeat it in Spirit Combat, and then exorcise the 
spirit, or banish it by successfully casting a specific type of expulsion 
magic. If the original body of a mortal possessor has been killed 
in its absence, then its soul usually dies when it is exorcised. Spirits 
merely return to the Spirit World.. 

Needless to say, a possessing spirit or soul can willingly abandon 
a possession at any time. 

DOoMmIiNnAaNnTt POoSsSsEeSsSsiIoOnN at night when they are sleeping, thus keeping their existence secret, 

Dominant Possession occurs when the possessing spirit takes save for inevitable physical exhaustion, and odd fleeting nightmares. 

complete control of the body. The victim is fully aware that its body Detecting a covert possession requires a successful Opposed roll 

has been taken over but is absolutely powerless, unable to take any of the investigator’s Insight (if viewed magically) or Trance skill ver- 

action at all. The possessor does not have access to any of the mem- sus the spirit’s Stealth skill. 

ories, skills or magic of the possessed, but substitutes its own instead. 
To actively detect a dominant possession requires a successful, 

unopposed test of either Insight if viewed magically, or Trance. 
ANnIiMmIisSmM TRrIicCkKSs 

PAaSsSsIivVEe POoSsSsEeSsSsiIoOnN Animism provides a great deal of flexibility in mimicking most 

Passive Possession occurs when the spirit lodges itself within the historical or fantasy forms of animism, shamanism and totemism. 

victim, but is unable to seize control, allowing the host to remain in Yet there are a number of cunning tricks used in novels or recorded 

full command of its faculties. Instead the spirit ‘merely’ inflicts its in cultural mythology that Games Masters can use, or grant to spe- 

powers on the host’s body. cific cults as part of their secret teachings. 

COoVvEeRrTt POoSsSsEeSsSsiIoOnN REeJjuUVvEenNAaTtIinNgG SPpIiRrIitTSs 
As per Passive Possession, but the spirit remains hidden. The vic- As described in the Spiritual Attributes section, the Magic Points 

tim remains unaware of his possession, unless the spirit chooses to of a spirit only recover when it is in the Spirit World, since it is the 

inform him of its presence. Some spirits take over the victim’s body source which provides their magical life-force. Those spirits present 
in the material world, whether bound to a fetish or manifested via 
summoning, have no way of recovering their energy, and may even- 

DiiaBboouliic SPpIirIitTSs tually wither away depending on how badly they are treated. 

Inmany cultures spirits have long been thought of as demons or devils, In a similar way the souls of corporeal creatures cannot recover 

otherworldly beings who take control of the living to wreak havoc in the their Magic Points whilst present in the Spirit World, since their 

real world. With the wide range of abilities, and spirit types available, it magical strength comes from the physical world. 

would be easy for a Games Master to use animism to design fully fledged Animists whose spirits have been damaged by magical attacks or 

demonologists, perhaps even using Wraiths as a templatefor more material Spirit Combat may therefore have a difficult choice to make. Man- 

demons. The stereotypucal hierarchy of the underworld could easily be umitting a spirit from a fetish so it can return to the Spirit World 

replicated by assigning increasing Intensily lo hugher ranked fiends, with will allow it to recover its strength, but there is no guarantee it will 

Demon Lords possessing Intensity 6 or lugher. permit itself to be re-bound. Conversely failing to liberate a greatly 

. 4 weakened spirit is effectively condemning it to impotence, or even 

140



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

death: something the cult, tradition or donator of the spirit may 
frown upon. SPpIiRrIitTSs iInN DIiFfFfeErReEnNTt SEeTtTtIinNgGSs 

To overcome this, animists can ceremonially sacrifice their own 1In pseudo-historical settings the presence of a spirit, and its effects are 

Magic Points directly to the damaged spirit, restoring its essence. normally invisible to the naked eye. Clues can be given to their attendance 

This helps prevent a spirit from withering away, and has no detri- using other perceptions, skin breaking out in goosebumps or a faint moan- 

mental effect on the animist, who may regain donated Magic Points ing for example — but without some_form of magical detection, bound or 

normally through whichever methods are used in the campaign. summoned spirits cannot be targeted. 
In low fantasy settings the existence of a spirit can be more obvious. 

SPpIiRrIitT TRrAaPpSs T he immediate area around the spurit might take on certain visual cues, for 

A whole array of cunning traps can be prepared using spirits, instance hallucinatory morphing of objects seen out of the corner of the 

to guard a particular item or area. The classic method is to con- eye or an inexplicable deepening of shadows. To target such mangfestations 

struct a fetish from fragile material (or one that will be inadvertently without magical aid requires a successful Perception check in each round. 

destroyed as part of everyday use) thereby unbinding the spirit held In epuc fantasy settings the presence of manifested spirits s clearly 

within; such as a log hidden in a wood pile which will be burned for seen, and can be directly targeted. The source, and nature of the spir- 

heat, or a carefully inscribed mandala drawn into the sandy floor of uts durectly affects their appearance. A lotemuc shaman for instance may 

a cave. Breaking the fetish allows the spirit to escape; and woe betide appear to be guarded by a ghostly black wolf which eats any spell cast at 

those who are in the vicinity. Hostile entities like wraiths, curse or uts master; whilst a victim of a domanantly possessing sickness spirit may 

sickness spirits are preferred for such traps because, on release they appear to have his skin constantly erupting in weeping sores, and pustules. 

can engage tresspassers in Spirit Combat to take their revenge. The visibility of sperits in a campaign should be considered carefully, 
as it can set the tone of animast magic. Zero or low visibility makes tack- 

BIinNdDIinNgG Aa SoOUuLl iInNtToO aA LIivViInNgG CRrEeAaTtuURrEe ling animasts dangerous, but adds greatly to a feeling of suspicion, and 
Binding a soul of a sapient person into another living creature is Jear. Highly visible spirits arefar easer to defeat with magic, but provide 

a nefarious act reserved for those cults that revel in chaos and evil. a very dramatic impact. 
The host beast is usually something considered insulting or taboo, - 4 
and usually of little threat to the animist who performs the binding. 
Whether the original body of the victim is left to die from neglect transcendence to the source of all things or whatever afterlife is des- 

or is utilised in some other way depends on the objective of the ani- tined for them. 

mist. Some Bindings are simply temporary punishments designed In the Spirit World they cannot regain Magic Points, and it is 

to humiliate; the creator permitting the victim to return to his body only a matter of time before natural attrition from aggressive spir- 

after the lesson is learned. its finally dissipates their soul. To avoid this, most animists try to 
locate the nearest living creature they feel capable of discorporating, 

BOoDdYy SnNAaTtcChHIinNgG defeating in Spirit Combat, and possess it. This could be anything 

Body snatching takes the concept of soul binding one step fur- from a small animal to their own murderer. 

ther, using it for subversive purposes. A demon ruling a kingdom Once returned to a living body the shaman can recover Magic 

using the body of its monarch is a familiar trope of Sword & Sorcery Points normally. However the maximum number of Magic Points 

fantasy. the shaman can muster is limited by the Characteristic POW of the 

To body snatch the animist chooses a victim and, after defeating creature they now occupy. 

them in Spirit Combat, binds their soul into another creature. The Of course a shaman who persists in this semi-vampiric manner 

empty body that remains is then inhabited by the animist, who need is vulnerable to being exorcised. If this occurs it may result in the 

not worry about a potentially hostile soul co-habiting the physical shaman’s true death or force them to restart the cycle, depending on 

shell; nor about triggering the suspicion of anyone in search of pos- how they achieved their first self-~aware reincarnation. 

session regarding the snatched body via Trance or other magical Several options are: 

means.. 
& Knowledge of how to survive after death is inherent with gain- 

Body snatches are nearly impossible to detect, save for the 
ing the rank of High Shaman. Such animists must succeed in 

changed personality of the occupant. Physically the disguise is per- 
an Opposed test of their Trance skill against the Attack roll 

fect. The animist’s own body may be in some danger whilst he takes 
which killed them, or else be overwhelmed by the shock of 

command of another. In settings where fetches are unknown, the 
the blow, and unable to prevent their soul from transcending 

usual stereotype is that the spiritualist literally exchanges bodies with 
& The shaman must succeed in an unopposed Willpower test, 

the victim; so that a tenant remains who will, at the very least, feed 
but also needs to define what his objective for continued liv- 

his temporarily abandoned shell. 
ing will be. Once he has achieved this aim the shaman’s soul 

Of course if the animist’s original body dies he no longer has any 
continues to the afterlife. 

place to escape back to, causing his own death if somehow exorcised. 

SuURrVvIivVIinNgG aAFfTtEerR DEeAaTthH BIinNdDIinNgG HUuGgEe SPpIiRrIitTSs 
A technique passed down amongst a few highly skilled shamans As Spirit Combat suggests, larger spirits can be challenged by 

is the ability to survive after death. Since highly skilled animists have a group of animists acting in concert. Whilst fundamentally dan- 
rigid control over their own soul, they can hold themselves on the gerous (since individual animists could easily be slain with a single 
Spirit Plane for some specific purpose, effectively postponing their backlash) such efforts can be rewarded by overthrowing spirits of 

141



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

impressively large Intensity. The defeat of such spirits permits the All spirits are sentient, although the degree of sentience varies 
animists to bind, dissipate or extract a single service from the entity. according to the spirit’s representation and type. Ancestor spirits, for 

Binding the spirit can be a liability. Choosing to bind the spirit example, are fully sapient, and display all the intelligence and coher- 
within a fetish effectively imprisons it - a good thing if the spirit in ence of their mortal form; but nature spirits are likely to behave, 
question is malicious or destructive. On the other hand, the spirit’s perceive, and articulate themselves in ways that reflect their origin. 
POW may make it impossible to control by anyone calling it out of Skilled animists are capable of interpreting their (sometimes inco- 
the fetish. herent) ways of communicating, through their training and expo- 

Requesting a service from the spirit is also risky. Usually the boon sure to the Spirit World. 
is deferred to a later time, granting the spirit a chance to recover. 
Such requests are normally granted to the cult or tradition of those 

DEeSsIigGnNIinNgG SPpIiRrIitTSs 
that managed to defeat it, rather to a specific individual. However 

Most of the spirits listed in this chapter are starting examples of 
this does permit any member of that cult who knows of the bargain 

a vast range of possibilities. To create new and unique spirits, use the 
and the name of the entity to call upon the owed debt. 

following guidelines: 

& Fach type of spirit possesses one or more abilities which 

SPpIirRIitT TYyPpEeSs encompas their powers. Not all spirits are designed to grant 
an advantage to an animist, some are intended only as chal- 

Spirits come in many forms, ranging from minor nature spirits lenges for characters to defeat. 
through to powerful kami of major environmental forces, beyond & Any advantage a spirit might offer when bound should be 
mortal control; mischievous ghosts through to dreadful undead capable of being sustained as a permanent effect. The advan- 
manifestations. tage should also be roughly balanced according to other com- 

Although spirits are living entities rather than mechanistic spells, parable spirits, and the other forms of higher magic (mysti- 
they still have specific sources or powers to which they are associated. cism, theism and sorcery). 

& A spirit can be an incarnation of an abstract magical or nat- & An advantage is always proportional to a spirit’s Intensity. 

ural effect Since spirits usually have no defined limit to their POW, spir- 

& A spirit can be the individual or collective essence of a species its often come in weaker and stronger forms. 

of plant or animal & All spirits possess certain default skills, Spirits start with a 

& A spirit can be the venerated soul of a dead ancestor Spectral Combat skill equal to 50%+POW+CHA, and a 

& A spirit can be the vengeful remnant of a dead creature Willpower of 50%+POWx2). 

APpPpLlYyIinNgG SPpIirRIitT POoWwEeRrSs 
SPpIirRIitT ABbILilIiTtIieESs 

Animasts can use a spurit’s powers mn three ways; Augmentation, 
Several of the following abilities rely on the spirit first infesting 

Embodiment, Abdication, and Discorporation. 
the target, in the form of either dominant, passive or covert posses- 

Augmentation: The simplest, and safest spurits are Nature, and 
sion. This requires that the victim is beaten in Spirit Combat as per 

Guardian spirits who augment the animist. The spirit gives the prac- 
Consequences of Defeat (page 138) or it gains the Possess Special 

titioner a benefit by flowing through or around his body, and is easily 
Effect. 

returned to a fetish. An animist who walks through someform of magical 
anti-sprrit barrer will strp his augmenting spirits away i it powerful 

ANnIiMmAaTtEe (SpPEeCcIiFfIicC SUuBbSsTtaANnCcEe)) 
enough to affect them. 

The spirit can embody itself into non-living matter, allowing it to 
Embodiment: This is the active task of assimilating a spirit’s 

shape or move the substance as if an actual body. If the material is a 
powers, and advantages into the animust’s physical being, directly channel- 

pure element such as earth or fire, the spirit may manifest itself phys- 
ling, and becoming one with the spirit. Elemental or Shape-shifiing spurits 

ically as per an Elemental with a size in cubic metres equal to twice 
work in this way. Embodiment can be risky, and demanding: a weak 

its Intensity (page 242). If, on the other hand, the material is flesh of 
animist who cautiusly embodies such a spirit risks being consumed or 

a dead creature, it instead provides the powers of an Undeath spirit 
entrapped by it. Whilst embodying a spurit, the animust is unable to phys- 

granting bonuses to physical Characteristics (page 153). 
wally cross anti-sparit barriers that are strong enough to stop a spurit of 
that Intensiy. AUuTtoOnNoOMmYy 

Abdication: Tlus is where an animust surrenders control of s body Spirit has the ability to venture beyond the normal distance limits 
by willingly letting humself be possessed. Thus normally applies to ances- of a binding or its summoner’s aura of influence. This allows the 
lor spurits that possess the animast, taking complete command. However spirit to act as an independent scout or messenger. 
other spirits, espectally those of great power or authority, might demand 
use of the animust’s body in exchangefor performing a service. Should an BLlEess 
ancestor or great spirit not wish to depart, there is little the unfortunate The spirit can boost one Attribute or Skill of whomever controls 
practitioner can do. As with embodiment, Animism-suppressing or -coun- it. The amount increased depends on the Intensity of the spirit, and 
tering magics will pose a physical barrier to a possessed animast. the specific type of blessing (see Curse Spirit Effects table for associ- 

ated costs), but no Attribute or Skill may be boosted beyond double 
< 4 its original value. 

142



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

CAaNnNnIBibAaLIliSsTtIicC their Damage Modifier, or alternately cursed with clumsiness in war 

The spirit gains the ability to regenerate its own Magic Points by by using a spirit which reduces one of the victim’s combat styles. 

absorbing the essence of spirits it battles in Spirit Combat. Every 
successful attack the spirit makes transfers that many Magic Points DeeAaDdLlYy 

to its own total. If this exceeds the spirit’s own POW, any surplus Gains the ability to either Dissipate or Sunder a spirit it has 

energy is wasted. beaten in Spirit Combat (page 137). A spirit may only have the abil- 
ity to inflict one or the other, not both. 

COoMmPpRrEeHhEeNnSsIioOnN 
Grants the ability to understand and speak with creatures asso- DEeMmEeSsNnEe 

ciated with that spirit or its animal totem. For example, a wolf spirit A potent ability, the spirit gains dominion over aspects of its envi- 

would allow its user to speak with wolves. ronment within a range of one hundred times its POW in metres. 
Normally the limits of its influence are specified in the spirit’s 

COoNnJjUuGgAaTtEe description. For example, a plant spirit could control the growth, 

Spirit can maintain a permanent mental link with an animist flowering and fruiting of vegetation within its area of effect, whilst a 

who summons or binds it, no matter the distance between the two or truth spirit might prevent falsehoods being uttered. If the demesne 

seperation if one or other is within the Spirit World. of the spirit is challenged by a character, they may attempt to over- 
come its power by winning an opposed roll of relevant skills. For 

COoVvEeRrTt example, to lie within the demesne of the truth spirit would require 
The spirit has a Stealth skill at 50%+INT+CHA, with which it opposing the spirit’s Willpower with the character’s Deceit skill. 

can hide from active magical or spiritual observation by opposing 
the Perception skill of the observer. D1iSscCoORrPpOoRrAaTtEe 

Assuming the spirit is not bound, it may drag the soul of a mortal 
CUuRrSsEe from their body into the Spirit World. The spirit has a base Dis- 

The spirit can lower one Attribute or Skill of a victim it passively corporate skill of 50%+POW+INT. An unwilling target may resist 
or covertly possesses. The amount reduced depends on the Intensity the attempt in an opposed roll of their Willpower versus the spirit’s 
of the spirit and the specific type of curse. For example, a victim Discorporate skill. If they succeed, they cannot be affected by the 
could be cursed with weakness if possessed by a spirit which reduces discorporation ability of that spirit again, until a full day has passed. 

DiiseAase 
The spirit carries one or more diseases. Instead of possessing a 

CUuRrSsEe SPpIiRrIitT EFfFfEeCcTtSs 
victim, it instead infects them via Spirit Combat, providing it suc- 

Curse Type Effect Notes 
ceeds in an attack, and gains one or more levels of success over the 

1 per three full A possessed victim can be rendered 
Action Points foe. Once infected, the victim must roll against their Endurance skill 

points of Intensity helpless if reduced to zero Action Points 
to determine the severity of the disease, suffering a reduction if the 

1 per point of Only reduces natural armour, not worn 
Armour Points spirit’s Willpower skill is higher, and over 100%. 

Intensity armour 
Depending on the result of the Endurance roll, the severity is as 

1 step per point of This can reduce a Damage Modifier to 
Damage Modifier follows: 

Intensity negative values 

Experience 1 per two full If lowered to zero, the victim can no & Critical: severity is Chronic, effect occurs each week. 

Modifier points of Intensity longer improve their skills & Success: severity is Acute, effect occurs each day. 

A possessed character reduced to zero & Tailure: severity is Terminal, effect occurs each hour, 
1 per two full 

Healing Rate can no longer heal naturally, and must & Fumble: victim is possessed by the spirit, and becomes an 
points of Intensity 

rely on magic instead asymptomatic carrier of the disease, inadvertently infecting 

1 per point of If a Hit Location is reduced to zero, it is others with whom they come into physical contact. 
Hit Points 

Intensity treated as if suffering a Serious Wound 
An imparted disease endures until the sickness is cured magically. 

1 per two full 
Luck Points Bad luck! The type of condition (page 75) is limited by the Intensity of the car- 

points of Intensity 
rying spirit. Nothing prevents a spirit carrying a combination of dis- 

1 per point of If reduced to zero the possessed 
Movement Rate ease conditions, save that the total Intensity cost cannot exceed that 

Intensity character can barely crawl 
of the spirit. For instance an Intensity 3 sickness spirit could carry 

2 per point of Strike Rank can be reduced to negative 
Strike Rank Bleeding disease, or a combination of Blindness and Fever instead. 

Intensity values 

1 Difficulty Grade The affected skill can be rendered « Intensity 1: Confusion, Contagious, Exhaustion, Fever, Hallu- 

Skill per two full points unusable if the Difficulty Grade reaches cination, Nausea, Sapping 

of Intensity Hopeless & Intensity 2: Blindness, Deafness, Dumbness, Maiming, 
Mania, Weakness 

& Intensity 3: Agony, Bleeding, Paralysis, Unconsciousness 
& Intensity 4: Asphyxiation, Death 

If the spirit has more than one condition, they trigger in cascad- 
ing sequence in assending order of required Intensity. Thus a victim 

143



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

of the previously described Intensity 3 spirit would suffer fever the minimum Intensity of spirit required to inflict that state of mind, 
first time the disease takes effect, then fever and blindness the sec- assuming it manages to possess the target. 
ond, after which (since the blindness might be permanent) the victim Ammnesia Spirits (1): An amnesia spirit makes the victim chron- 
will suffer fever each occurance thereafter. ically forgetful. Although it has no effect on skills, it does prevent 

them from remembering anything that happens during the period 
DOoMmIiNnAaTtIioOnN (SpPEeCcIiFfIicC SPpEeCcIiEeSs) of their possession. This doesn’t stop the host from behaving nor- 

Allows totemic spirits to command all living animals related to mally (assuming they do not act on knowledge revealed since the 
it within a distance equal to its POW in metres. A serpent spirit for amnesia started), only that they have no recollection of it, even after 
example could dominate all snakes within range. the spirit is expelled. 

Confusion Spirits (2): Causes confusion during times of stress, 
EnNdDoOWwMmEeNnTt (SpPEeCcIiFfIicC CAaPpAaBbILilIiTtYy) or at the malicious whim of the possessing spirit. During a confusion 

The spirit grants the magician a special capability, sense, move- attack, any skill attempt made by the host is resisted by spirit’s Will- 
ment or resistance as owned by the spirit’s totem. Usually these take power in an opposed test. If the victim loses, they do the incorrect 
the form of a Creature Ability (page 214), or combat Special Effect. 

thing, possibly striking the wrong target in combat, casting a differ- 
The minimum required spirit Intensity varies, depending on the 

ent spell to what was intended, answering a question which wasn’t 
capability endowed, and nature of the spirit cult. 

asked, and so on. 
Deceit Spirits (1): Induces the possessed victim to lie, cheat 

ETteErRnNAaLl 
and steal, no matter the consequences. They simply cannot help 

The spirit has Recurring trait (page 138), which enables it to 
themselves, although they can attempt to disguise their subterfuge 

return after being dissipated. 
through use of the Deceit and Conceal skills. 

Fear Spirits (2): The possessed host suffers foreboding and 
GLlaAmMOoUuRr 

Enables the spirit to create illusions within a range equal to its timidity, as if they were under the effect of the Demoralise spell 

POW in metres. This glamour is a mental illusion that works in a (page 125). The subject of the fear must be related to the cult or 

similar way to the sorcery spell Phantom (Sense) (page 171). The tradition, thus a sea based spirit could inflict a fear of drowning, 

spirit can affect one sense per level of its Intensity, with a Magnitude and so on. 

of twice that. Greed Spirits (1): Also known as Gluttony Spirits, possession 
causes the host to become enamoured of a specific item, substance 

HEeAaLlIinNgG or stimulus. Whenever the victim comes into contact with the object 

The spirit is able to cure the effects of disease, if its Intensity is of their greed, they will attempt to horde, secrete, covert, consume 

sufficient to counter the condition (see Disease Ability, page 143). or immerse themselves to their detriment for the next 1d3 hours. 

It also permits recovery of Minor, Serious and Major Wounds Examples might be alcohol, gold, or even sexual liaison. 

(although they are unable to replace lost limbs), by sacrificing 1 Grief Spirits (3): Instils a sense of loss so great that the host 

Magic Point per Hit Point healed. becomes passively suicidal. They do not actively seek dangerous sit- 
uations, but will only half-heartedly protect themselves if one occurs. 

MAaNnAa Whenever asked to parry, evade or make an opposed test, to resist 
Permits the spirit to donate its Magic Points to the summoner hostile magic for instance, the victim must reverse the number rolled 

or holder of its fetish, for use in casting magic or aiding in Spirit on the dice if it would generate a worse result. 
Combat. Hate Spirits (2): These spirits exaggerate the possessed host’s 

natural inclinations towards a particular individual, race, cult or cul- 
MAaNnIFifEeSsTtAaTtIioOnN ture, making them irritable and surly. Whenever the opportunity 

Spirit may move between the mundane and Spirit World at will. presents itself, usually when unobserved, the victim will succumb to 
It takes one Action to shift from one to the other. Whilst in the Spirit overwhelming hatred; leading them to quarrel with, brutalise, tor- 
World the spirit is immune from all attacks (magical or physical) ture, or rarely to even murder the object of their hate. 
from corporal opponents. Love Spirits (1): The newly possessed host falls in love with the 

first compatible partner he or she sees. Once a love object is found, 
MiiAasmMAa 

the host is utterly infatuated, gaining a Love (Individual) Passion 
Enables the spirit to induce feelings of despair, dread and horror 

equal to the Willpower value of the spirit. This is thereafter used 
within a radius of its POW in metres. The Magnitude of the effect 

as an opposing motivation whenever the host is called to leave their 
is equal to twice the spirit’s Intensity. Anyone unable to block the 

beloved, or work against his or her interests. 
magic must succeed in an opposed test of Willpower skills, or else 

Madness Spirits (2): Akin to having a demon whispering into 
flee the area in abject terror. 

your ear, madness spirits force the host — at times of stress — into 
acts of irrational or gibbering behaviour. Depending on the spirit’s 

PassioonN (SpeciiFfic EmMOoTtIioOnN oORr DIiSsoORrDdEeRr)) 
inclination, this is done by changing the perceptions of the victim, 

The spirit can invoke an overwhelmingly strong passion or state 
sadistically torturing them, or instilling a degree of increasing para- 

of mind in those it possesses. Although in a few cases they can be 
noia. Madness attacks last 1d3x10 minutes, occurring whenever a 

used beneficently, most are used in a hostile manner. The follow- 
skill check is made by the host, and the spirit overcomes that roll in 

ing passions and mental disorders provide mechanical effects of 
an opposed test using its Willpower. 

how they should be used in play. As with the Disease Ability (page 
143), each has an associated number in parentheses, showing the 

144



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

Violence Spirits (3): Removes all ethical and moral restraints TEeLlEeKkIiNnEeSsIiSs 
towards using combat to solve problems. Any hint of dissent or out- This ability grants the spirit the ability to move objects in the 
right threat will trigger a violent outburst. Worse still, the host glories physical world despite its nominally intangible form. It gains a STR 
in violence so much that they will joyously brutalise all living things equal to its Intensity, and can shift items up to its POW in metres 
within reach, be they friend, foe or even innocents. Violent outbursts distant. 
can be resisted if the host can overcome the spirit in an opposed 
test of Willpower, but once triggered, the violence only stops when WAaRrDdIinNGg 
the host is incapacitated by exhaustion or a lack of responding vic- Gains the ability to ward off hostile magic from something 

tims. Note that violence does not necessarily equate to death — most the spirit guards, automatically blocking spells with a Magnitude 

hosts utilising their natural weapons over drawing a weapon, unless less than or equal to twice the spirit’s Intensity. Although magic is 

directly threatened by one first. blocked, it is not dismissed by contact with the spirit. For instance, 
weapon enhancement spells do not vanish when the magician is hit, 

PEeRrCcEePpTtIivVEe nor is the enchanted weapon prevented from striking them; only that 
Spirit has the ability to see possessing spirits, bound spirits inside any magical boosting to damage does not occur. 

creatures and fetishes, shapeshifted beings, and penetrate illusions 
in its immediate vicinity. The spirit has a base Perceive Unseen skill WIiTtHhEeRr 
of 50%+POW+INT which can be countered by the target of its The spirit is able to physically damage corporeal beings, using 

scrutiny with an opposed test against Conceal, Disguise, Stealth, or its Spectral Combat skill or some other Combat Style it possessed 

a pertinent magical skill. before death. The blows inflicts damage equal to its usual Spirit 
Damage that ignores all non-magical parries and physical armour; 

PEeRrSsIisStTeEnNtT requiring opponents to Evade or flee its attacks. 
The spirit gains immunity to magical dismissal of any form. This 

does not mean it is immune to magical damage or Spirit Combat, 
EXxAaMmPpLlEe SPpIiRrIitTSs 

only that spells such as Banish or Exorcism do not affect it. 
The following spirits are presented with base Characteristic 

PUuPpPpEeTtEeEerR ranges and skills. However since the POW of the spirit depends on 

The possessing spirit can control the physical body of others. the Intensity chosen for it (see Defining Spirits page 132), no average 

It can be used benevolently to take control of a totem animal or Attributes are provided as they fluctuate according to the POW of 

protect a spirit magician’s body whilst he is discorporate. Hostile the spirit. 

spirits on the other hand, use this ability to steal the body of a foe to Nothing prevents a Games Master from adding or removing 

achieve the spirit’s strongest desires. abilities from the following spirits to create unique entities more 
suited to their campaign settings. 

SaAGgAaCcIiTtYy 
Possesses a skill at a value equal to the spirit’s 100% + (INTx2). ANnCcEeSsTtoORr SPpIiRrIitTSs 

There is no limit to the type of skill imparted, provided it is rele- Eternal, plus one or more of Discorporate, Sagactty, Spellcasting, and 

vant to the spirit concerned. So a spirit devoted to war might know Subjugate 

weapon skills, whereas one linked to a particular family may provide Ancestor spirits are the souls of family members who, after 

genealogical knowledge instead. death, reside either in the Spirit World, in the underworld or what- 
ever afterlife is provided by the local pantheon; all depending on the 

ShHAaPpeEcChHaAnNGgEe (SpPEeCcIiFfIicC SPpEeCcIiEeSs) setting. An animist who quests in the Spirit World can always find 

Grants the ability to shape change the spirit magician into his a way to reach these places, although he will normally only ever 

cult’s totem animal, as described under Shape-shifting spirits (page encounter ancestors with whom he has a relationship, finding both 

152). venerated predecessors and despised enemies. Such spirits can be 
found continuing their existence in houses, halls, tribes or commu- 

SPpEeLllLcCaASstTiInNgG nities resembling those they occupied before death; or despondently 
Allows the spirit to either cast magic on behalf of its summoner wandering in the gloom of limbo. 

with a skill of 50%+POW+CHA, or share knowledge of the spells Animists may ask questions or request aid from their honoured 
it knows with the holder of its fetish. ancestors; or conversely attempt to bind and imprison an enemy 

ancestor, preventing it from being called upon by their foes. 
SuUBbJjuUgGAaTtEe Ancestor spirits are a natural source of knowledge and informa- 

Allows the spirit the ability to bind one or more other spirits of tion. In their mortal life they achieved greatness through skills, tal- 
lesser Intensity, holding them as vassals without the necessity of a ents, and deeds that have secured their continued veneration in the 
fetish. Tor spirits of the same tradition, this is usually a willing servi- afterlife. The spirits of those who died without noteworthy deeds 
tude — a mountain spirit holding several lesser earth elemental spir- tend to fade and dissipate, once their immediate descendants pass 
its, for instance. If the spirits are not associated, the subjugation is on. Thus most ancestor spirits are noted heroes, remembered many 
more one of forced enslavement. Each lesser spirit held in subjuga- generations after their death, and continually honoured in ceremo- 
tion reduces the holding spirit’s Magic Points by a value equal to its nies personal and grand, small and large. 
Intensity as an enduring cost. Subjugation ends if the holding spirit A specific ancestor spirit is summoned to the material world by 
is ever reduced to zero Magic Points. an animist of direct descent. If there is no blood-lineage, a shaman 

145



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

CURSE SPIRIT FLEMENTAL 
PI{EDATOI{_"}

PIR}_T 

wwem ATT L 

must travel to the home of the ancestor in its afterlife. Once sum- time for it to emerge. Such confinement is extremely unpleasant for 
moned or located, the spirit can be asked questions concerning the the ancestor spirit, and so the expectation is that it last for a very 
family line, or events which happened during its lifetime. Such short time — days rather than weeks or months. Any longer, and the 
requests only require a successful Influence roll, the offering of 1 ancestor may turn hostile and immediately return to the Spirit Plane 
Magic Point — representing a donation of blood or life-force— and upon release, after extracting suitable penance from the summoner. 
cost nothing further. Physically incarnating requires the descendent to voluntarily 

Animists can also request an ancestor’s aid in performing a spe- permit the ancestor spirit to possess his body. This bargain places 
cific and important service. This comes at a greater cost, involving the animist at a dangerous disadvantage since he cannot prevent 
an immediate sacrifice of at least 1 Magic Point per Intensity of the his body from being abused by the ancestor spirit. Unsympathetic 
ancestor, and continued votive gifts to that particular spirit (if nec- ancestors often succumb to long forgotten passions, or attempt 
essary this can be abstracted to either spending an Experience Roll extreme acts to further their renown — being in little danger of per- 
cach year or one Magic Point each month, if Games Masters prefer). sonal harm if their host dies. 
Continued veneration in this way keeps the memory of the ances- Whilst possessed, the animist may gain access to new abilities, 
tor alive, promoting his continued existence. In return the ancestor spells, and spirits pertaining to the ancestor. Warrior ancestors have 
grants its help to overcome the problem facing the petitioner. combat skills, shaman ancestors have spirit skills, hunter ancestors 

Ancestor spirits are very versatile, and may either agree to per- have stealth and tracking skills, medicine ancestors have healing 
form a single service as a spirit there and then, or offer to incarnate skills, and so on. 
in the body of the descendent if this is a more appropriate act. Residing in another body or object means that an ancestor spirit 

Certain ancestors might be prepared to temporarily inhabit an cannot be called upon by other members of that cult or tradition; 
heirloom or item (such as a tribal treasure) of great personal signif- for this reason an ancestor spirit usually only remains until it has 
icance in order to be manifested later. The item can be anything achieved the summoning objective. Regardless of how the ancestor 
held in esteem by the community, and the ancestor will bind itself to is incarnated or lodged, it counts against the animist’s number of 
the item as if it were a fetish, and wait within until the appropriate spirits that can be controlled. 

146



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

SPpIiRrIitTSs THhAaTt InNIitTiIaAtTeE COoMmBbAaTt QUuEeSsTtIioONnIinNgG ANnCcEeSsTtOoRrSs 
Although all sprits have a Spectral Combat skill, it does not mean Some animist traditions requare the ancestor to inhabit the body of its 

that an animast can send any old spirit off to engage a mortal in Spirit summoner in the material world, so that it can communicate directly with 
Combat. Spirits are not ubiquitous fire-and-forget weapons to destroy an those who question it; rather than indirectly via a go-between. In settings 
enemy’s Magic Points. Rather they have a specific purpose, and alternate where this is the norm, an animist must always voluntarily permut the 
abilities to back it up. ancestor to possess them unless the animust has travelled into the Sperit 

The important term here is initiate. Whilst a spirit can always Plane to question the spirit in its home in the afterlife. Where an animist 
Jight back when attacked, most cannot start a Spirit Combat except against has abdicated control of hus body, the ancestor will usually respect the 
particularf oes. trust of the summonen; and leave of its own_free will once it has satisfied 

Each of the common spirit types mentioned in this chapler has a all enquaries. 
defined limut clarifying i, and what types of target, that spirit can initiate 
Spirit Combat with. ANnCcEeSsTtRrAaLl DEeMmIiGgOoDdSs 

Savef or a handful of cases (Ancestor;, Curse, Death or Sickness spirits When a soulf urst departsfor the aflerlife, it becomes a spurit of equal 

Jor example) none of  the described spirits can be used to aggressively insti- POW 1o its lwing self. However; over time those ancestral spirits which 

gale an attack against mortals in Spirit Combat. recewe regular worshipy, and propitiation slowly grow in strength. 1t may 
take centuries, but ultimately the spurit will transcend their normal species 

A\ 3 bmit to characteristic POW. In this way the spirits of tribal_founders, 
national heroes or even assuaged enemies can eventually become demigods 

Repeated summonings or being summoned for minor or trivial wn thewr own right. 
tasks may irritate the spirit, forcing the animist to defeat his ances- - 4 
tor in mock Spirit Combat. If the animist loses, then the ancestor 
considers the request below its dignity and refuses to help. If the Bane spirits are abhorred to the point that they are often bound 
animist wins instead, the ancestor is roused into providing aid, but and imprisoned in remote or accursed locations, preventing them 
the ancestor may be considered as either neutral or hostile. from causing irreparable harm. Only the insane, or those driven to 

suicidal revenge, tend to use them. If imbued into a fetish, bane spir- 
ANnCcEeSsTtoORr SPpIiRrIitT its can be used as a weapon nominally sent against other spirits to 

Characteristics engage in Spirit Combat. Bane spirits can destroy other bane spirits. 

INT: As per mortal of the species The majority of bane spirits are oblivious to the physical world, 

POW: As per its Intensity and lack the ability to manifest into the material realm to attack 
mortals. Instead they fester upon the Spirit World causing untold 

CHA: As per mortal of the species 
damage to other spirits which mistakenly stray into their vicinity. 

Skills: 

Culture and Lore skills of their people and region = 100%+(INTx2), 
BAaNnEe SPpIiRrIitT 

Spectral Combat = 50%+POW+CHA, 
Characteristics 

Willpower of 50%+POWx2) 
INS: 1d6 

In addition, the ancestor may take a number of selections, equal to 1d3+Intensity, POW: As per Intensity 

from the following list of Spirit Abilities: CHA: 1d6 

Skills: 
& Discorporate: allows the ancestor to summon the soul of a 

Spectral Combat = 50%+POW+CHA, 
nearby mortal descendent into the Spirit World. 

Willpower of 50%+POWx2) 
& Sagacity: spirit knows a skill relevant to the profession of the 

ancestor at 100%+(INTx2). 
CUuRrSsEe SPpIiRrIitTSs 

& Spellcasting: holds knowledge of 1d3 Folk Magic spells (which 
Curse, Covert, Manfestation 

it can cast assuming the ancestor has the Folk Magic skill). Overtly malicious, curse spirits are sent by animists to possess 
& Subjugate: ancestor has a spirit ally of one less Intensity than mortals bringing them misfortune. They can be found in places that 

itself, which appears within 1d3 Combat Rounds of being 
have suffered terrible natural disasters. 

summoned (assuming the ancestor has the Trance and Bind- Clurse spirits impose detrimental effects such as reduce Action 
ing skills). Points, slow Healing Rate, and so on. The conditions they inflict 

directly affect the possessed victim, and can only be stopped by exor- 

BAaNnEe SPpIiRrIitTSs cising the spirit, assuming the victim is even aware that he is pos- 

Canmibalistic, Deadly sessed in the first place. 

Fragments of pure Chaos or some other source of evil, bane 
spirits strive to absorb the essence of other spirits. Due to their rela- CUuRrSsEe SPpIiRrIitT 
tionship with entropy, once the Magic Points of the targeted spirit 
have been reduced to zero, the bane spirit consumes it utterly and INS: 2d6 

irrevocably, so that it is forever destroyed, even those with the Recur- POW: As per Intensity 

ring trait. CHA: 2d6 

147



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

Skills: able to sink into the ground as if some sort of amorphous creature 

Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, of flowing sand. 

Stealth = 50%+INS+CHA, Whilst embodying an elemental spirit, the Animist is physically 

Willpower = 50%+POWx2) immune to the elemental’s incidental effects himself, but cannot 
control their affect on his belongings or companions. So an embod- 

DEeAaTthH SPpIiRrIitTSs ied Salamander will burn away the animist’s clothes, consume his 
Deadly, Manifestation equipment, and potentially injure any nearby friends from radiated 
These spirits are viewed in different ways by different cultures. heat. Furthermore, expelling the elemental spirit is more difficult 

Some see dying as a natural part of the cycle of existence, and there- than for other spirits, as the animist must make a successful Trance 
fore nothing to be feared. Others are horrified by death spirits, see- roll to successfully force it back into the fetish, each attempt costing 
ing them as the tools of depraved animists to spread terror. The spir- an additional Magic Point. Finally, while in his elemental form, the 
it’s appearance reflects the attitude of the cult or tradition; peaceful animist is vulnerable to additional damage from an opposing ele- 
bringers of death taking the form of serene angels to guide the vic- ment. For all these reasons, embodying a powerful elemental spirit is 
tim to the afterlife, whereas murderous slayers might appear as such a step that is never undertaken lightly. 
things like burning skulls, giant poisonous animals or hooded, scythe Animists embodying an elemental spirit gain the abilities of an 
wielding vultures. elemental of a size based on the spirit’s Intensity as outlined below. 

Death spirits are sometimes bound to protect places and objects, 
or more often summoned to attack specific targets, attacking the ELleEmMEeNnTtAaLl InNTtEeNnSsIiTtYy/S1izZEe REeLlAaTtIioONnSsHhIiPp 

transgressor in Spirit Combat either way. If the spirit wins the bat- 
fft’::;w Elemental Size 

tle it Sunders the soul of the victim, ripping it free of its corporeal 
body, and sending it to whatever fate lies in store. This is invariably 1 2 cubic metres 

fatal for mortal creatures but preserves their essence and identity as 2 4 cubic metres 
a spirit. 

3 6 cubic metres 

4 8 cubic metres 
DEeaAtThH SPpIiRrIitT 

5 10 cubic metres 
Characteristics 

+1 +2 cubic metres, and so on 
INS: 3d6 

POW: As per Intensity 
The animist’s STR, DEX and Hit Points are replaced by the 

CHA: 3d6 spirit’s values (which are rolled as normal for an elemental of its 
Skills: SIZ when first encountered). This normally calls for an adjustment 
Spectral Combat = 50%+POW+CHA, of derived Attributes such as Combat Actions, Damage Modifier 
Willpower = 50%+POWx2) and Initiative Bonus. Any special attack the elemental possesses is 

retained but uses the animist’s Unarmed skill value instead. 
ELleEmMEeNnTtAaLl SPpIiRrIitTSs 

When the elemental spirit is expelled, any damage it sustained 
Animate, Demesne 

whilst embodied is divided evenly between all the animist’s Hit 
Elemental spirits are direct incarnations of the elements (earth, 

Locations (rounding up as usual). For example if a human shaman 
air, fire, water and darkness) or manifestations of natural forces and 

took 23 points of damage while in elemental form then he would 
phenomenon: mountains, volcanoes, tsunami, and so on. 

take 4 points of damage to each of his 7 locations once he returned 
Animists can bind elemental spirits in the normal manner but the 

to his normal form. If the damage is enough to cause a Serious 
object or location must be chosen carefully because, even within the 

Wound the animist must resist the injury effects by succeeding in a 
binding, some of the elemental spirit’s power is always manifested. A 

Hard Endurance roll, or a Formidable Endurance roll if a Major 
Salamander spirit must be bound into a fetish capable of withstand- 

Wound. The result of the roll is applied to all the critically injured 
ing heat while an Undine fetish will become damp and clammy. 

locations simultaneously. 
When summoned or released from a fetish an elemental spirit, if 

Although embodying an elemental spirit can be extremely 
left uncontrolled, will gravitate to the nearest source of its element 

impressive, it also opens the practitioner up to new problems. An 
within range. By itself it is just a spirit, and has no significant effect 

animist embodying an elemental spirit will take double damage from 
on the mundane plane. The spirit’s power does not truly manifest 

attacks using the opposing element, and can be instantly dispersed 
until commanded to embody itself. As with any control attempt, the 

by contact with an opposing elemental of the same size or bigger in 
animist must spend 1 Magic Point. If the roll is successful, the ani- 

cubic metres. Reducing the elemental form to 0 Hit Points instantly 
mist has two choices: Permitting the spirit to animate a suitable vol- 

breaks the binding and frees the spirit, possibly also critically injur- 
ume of its native material, as per a normal elemental, or, embodying 

ing or killing the magician in the process. Spells which can dismiss 
the elemental so that it manifests within his own body. 

elementals will free the elemental, and destroy the binding if the 
The later choice grants the animist the physical and magical ben- 

Magnitude of the magic is equal or greater than twice the spirit’s 
efits of an elemental. Thus an animist embodying a sylph would be 

Intensity. 
surrounded by a vortex of buffeting winds, but could fly and send 

Elemental spirits do not initiate Spirit Combat except against 
out jets of wind to pummel opponents. If a gnome was embodied 

other elemental spirits of an opposite element. 
instead, the animist would take on a gravelly appearance, and be 

148



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

FeEtTcChHEeSs 
QUuEeSsTtIinNgG fFoORr aA FeEtTcChH 

Special 
Questingf or a fetch is a dangerous ritual, and if itfails it may cripple 

A fetch is a shaman’s spiritual ally, representing the opening of 
or kill the shaman. No mechanics are suggested to abstract this process 

his consciousness in the Spirit World. Not every Shamanic tradition 
since such an epic undertaking should be played out in theform of a highly 

features fetches, and those that do vary in the nature of the fetch. 
challenging scenaro. 

In some traditions the fetch is the awakened “other half” of the 
Quests usually tnvolve the re-enactment of a cult's mythicfoundation 

shaman. In this case the fetch and shaman are two sides of the same 
lo locate or awaken the shaman’s fetch, and culminate in a dangerous 

soul with the fetch perceiving and travelling the Spirit World whilst 
battle against the traditional enemy of hus tradition. The quest includes 

the shaman exists on the mundane plane. 
moral ordeals involving both the shaman’s community, and his treatment 

In other traditions the fetch is a totemic spirit who is drawn to 
of spirits, the correct solutions being those endorsed, and taught by his 

the shaman to become his spiritual guide. In both cases the shaman 
cult. Trials of skill, cunning, and magical strength are also common, 

must undertake a successful quest in order to gain his fetch. 
the opponents the shaman_faces being the friendly, and neutral spirits of 

A fetch’s abilities vary widely between traditions. In cases where 
hus own tradition. The quest helps the shaman remforce hus relationships 

the fetch is the shaman’s counterpart, it represents the opening of 
with the spirit world, and he can use these bonds to aid in the climactic 

spiritual abilities to the shaman rather than being an independent 
confrontation. 

being in its own right. The fetch might provide the shaman with 
Failing in the final battle usually results in dissipation of the sha- 

exotic powers, such as the ability to shapechange. If the fetch is an 
man’s soul. Few tears are shed at such an occurrence as it generally indi- 

animal or ancestor guide then the shaman may gain the ability to 
cates that the candidate was not in sympathy with the ideas of the spurit 

communicate with the animals of the fetch’s species, control them 
tradition, or that they were dangerously overconfident of their own abili- 

or gain the traits of that creature; or become party to certain secrets 
ties. Either way, it us betterfor the cult that they failed rather than ending 

if the fetch is an ancestor. 
\ up as a flawed shaman. r 

There are two main choices when designing a fetch, an Awak- 
ened Fetch, where the shaman simply unlocks or expands a hitherto 

GUuAaRrDdIiaAnN SPpIiRrIitTSs 
hidden part of his soul; or an Allied Fetch which is a separate spirit 

Warding 
that forms a lifelong pact with the shaman. Unless otherwise stated, 

Guardian spirits protect the animist from hostile magic or indeed 
a fetch cannot roam any further from the shaman’s soul to which it 

other spirits. They are found in places where vast magics have been 
is bound than his POW in metres. 

unleashed, such as huge ceremonies or battlefields for example. 
Within the mundane plane a guardian spirit protects the holder 

FeTtCcchH TYyPpEeSs 
of its fetish by interposing itself before offensive spells. The spirit can 

Awakened Fetch Allied Fetch 
neutralize spells with a Magnitude of up to twice its own Intensity. 

INT: As the shaman 2d6+6 If the spell’s Magnitude is greater, the spirit is unable to affect it. If a 
POW: As the shaman 1d6+12 ardian spirit encounters an anti-spirit spell, such as Spirit Block or 
CHA:  As the shaman 2d6+6 FeEtTcChH ABbILilIiTtIiEeSs 
Skills: 1d20 Ability 1d20 Ability 

Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, 1 Animate 11 Eternal 

Lore (specific Cult or Tradition) = 100%+(INTx2), 2 Autonomy 12 Mana 
Willpower = 50%+POWx2) 

3 Cannibalistic 13 Manifestation 

& Intensity: A fetch’s intensity is calculated by cross-referencing 4 Comprehension 14 Perceptive 

the POW of the fetch on the Spirit Intensity Table on page 5 Conjugate 15 Persistent 

133. 6 Covert 16 Sagacity 
& Spirit Abilities: A fetch also possesses 1d3+Intensity abilities, 7 Deadly 17 Shapechange 

selected or rolled randomly from the Fetch Abilities table. 
8 Discorporate 18 Spellcasting 

Gaining a fetch always brings certain side-effects: 9 Domination 19 Subjugate 

10 Healing 20 Warding 
& The fetch may influence the personality of the shaman 

depending on its totemic nature, for instance a bear spirit Banish, it may attempt to resist the spell before it is affected. 
fetch may cause the shaman to become soporific during the A guardian spirit offers additional protection by intercepting 
winter. enemy spirits and engaging them in combat before they can attack 

& The fetch may draw upon the Magic Points of the shaman in the animist. They do not initiate Spirit Combat otherwise. 
times of dire need. 

& The fetch will abandon the shaman if he betrays the teach- GUuAaRrDdIiaAnN SPpIiRrIitT 
ings of his shamanic tradition. 

Fetches can grow in experience just as the shaman does. If INS: 1d6+6 

desired, a shaman can transfer any or all of his Experience rolls to POW: As per Intensity 

his fetch instead. CHA: 1d6+6 

149



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

Skills: Like bound spirits, haunts cannot regenerate Magic Points 

Spectral Combat = 50%+POW+CHA, normally — but they are able to slowly drain vitality from the nat- 

Willpower = 50%+(POWx2) ural world around them, a process that creates an unsettling area 
shunned by animals, and where the plants are stunted and withered. 

HAaUuNnTtSs A haunt can tap the Magic Points of any animal or plant that has 
FEternal, Mamfestation, plus one or more of Glamour; Miasma, Spellcasting, lower POW than the Haunt’s Intensity. 

Telekinesis and Wither When creating a haunt its skills and Characteristics can be gen- 
Haunts are the spirits of the dead who did not receive the proper erated randomly or directly taken from the dead person in question. 

funeral rites or who have died violently, and are incapable of leaving Restless spirits which have persisted for centuries often grow stron- 
the material world, denying them progress to the afterlife, and leav- ger over time, permitting some haunts to achieve higher levels of 
ing the soul to suffer for all eternity. Intensity. 

Mortals may end up becoming haunts in several ways: 
HAaUuNnTt 

& Cursed by a shaman. By enchanting the soul to be perma- 
Characteristics 

nently bound to the material world, and forbidding it access 
INT: As per Mortal of the species 

to the Spirit World the shaman creates an unliving hell for 
POW: As per Intensity 

the deceased. 
& Unfulfilled Desires. Dying before an important vow was com- CHA: As per Mortal of the species 

pleted or expiring full of hatred and rage, desiring revenge. Skills: 

In these cases a desperate character can tie themselves to the Willpower = 50%+(POWx2) 

material world by an act of will (roll POW or less on a d100). Add other skills as necessary to give the haunt poignancy or purpose, Sing or Lore 

This enables them to persist as a spirit until they can complete (Vital Campaign Secret) for example. 

their last wishes. 
& Driven by Passion: A soul can become a haunt by dying whilst Spirit Abilities: A haunt gains a number of abilities equal to its Intensity, selected 

overwhelmed by a great passion - unrequited love or despair from the following list: 

for instance. In these cases the chance of returning as a haunt &K Glamour: The spirit can create illusions which are experienced by all 
is simply Games Master fiat, according to how fitting it would within a range of the spirit’s POW in metres. Each glamour costs 1 
be to the campaign. Magic Point to create, and affects one sense per level of its Intensity. 

Haunts are bound to the material world, an unseen presence The ability is often used to replay the events that caused the haunt to be 

fully aware of what is occurring around it but unable to leave the created. 

immediate area of the location or item to which they are tied. The & Miasma: The spirit can magically inducef eelings of dread and horror to 

object they are linked to can be their unburied remains, their place anyone within range of its aura. Fach wave of miasma costs the spirit 

of death, some object associated with them in life, or something else 1 Magic Pont. 

entirely. Ghost stories of many cultures are filled with varied exam- & Spellcasting: Becoming a haunt usually severs the spirit_ from any_form 

ples of ties that prevent haunts from passing on. of lagher magic, but some may retain the ability to cast Folk Magic. The 

Although frightening, most of these spirits can do little but haunt either uses those spells known whilst alwe, or gains 1d3+1 spells 

appear as ghostly apparitions to hapless observers, and bewail their such as Befuddle, Curse, Disruption, and so on. 

fate. Nonetheless, some acquire certain powers during their transi- K Telekinesis: The spirit has a STR equal to ils Intensity which it can use 

tion to a haunt, each ability costing the haunt dearly in Magic Points to move items around. This costs 1 Magic Point, and lastsfor its POW 

to invoke. in minules. 

Like most spirits a Haunt is usually invisible, it may spend 1 &K Wither: The spirit is able to physically damage corporeal beings. For the 

Magic Point to manifest itself visually for up to its POW in minutes. cost of 1 Magic Point, the spirit can make a single attack with a skill 

Most haunts must manifest in order to use any of their abilities. equal lo whatever Combat Style or Unarmed skill it possessed before 

A manifested haunt remains intangible to physical objects, able death. The blow wnflicts damage equal to ils usual Spirit Damage that 

to pass through solid objects at will. On the other hand it becomes ignores all non-magical parries and physical armour. Magical Armour 

vulnerable to magic, although destroying it with magical damage Points reduce damage as normal. 

simply disperses its essence but does not prevent its eventual return. With all the other powers at their command, haunts do not initi- 
By default all haunts possess the Recurring trait. ate Spirit Combat against mortals. 

Permanently dealing with a haunt is not easy. Trance or magical 
senses may reveal the location of whatever ties it to the world. If MEeDdIiCcIinNEe SPpIiRrIitTSs 
this is an object, destroying it may be enough to release the spirit, Healing 
but depending on its motivation the haunt may fight against such Medicine spirits are used to heal wounds or cure disease effects 
actions. If on the other hand it is a location or more abstractly, an imparted by sickness spirits. They are rarely bound to a fetish save 
event, undoing the binding may require determining why the spirit by shamans who can rejuvinate them, since as all spirits, they can- 
became tied in the first place, and trying to resolve the issue. If tied not recover Magic Points naturally in the mundane world. Medi- 
to its mortal remains, conducting the ceremonies appropriate to the cine spirits are therefore usually summoned directly from the Spirit 
haunt’s own culture, and traditions may very well break the bonds, World to perform healing tasks. 
releasing the restless spirit to the afterlife it yearns. 

150



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

Peaceable by nature, a medicine spirit may only initiate Spirit cousins. See the Creatures chapter for further details of a variety of 
Combat against sickness spirits, their innate foes. creatures. 

MEeDdIiCcIinNEe SPpIirRIitT NAaTtUuRrEe SPpIiRrIitTSs 

Characteristics Animal Nature Spirit Regional Nature Spirit 

INS: 1d6+6 INS : As the species 1d6 

POW: As per Intensity POW: As per Intensity As per Intensity 

CHA: 1d6+6 CHA: Equal to INS 3d6 

Skills: Skills: 
Spectral Combat = 50%+POW+CHA, Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, 

Willpower = 50%+(POWx2) Willpower = 50%+(POWx2) 

Abilities: See Above. 

NAaTtUuRrEe SPpIiRrIitTSs 
PRrEedDAatToORr SPpIiRrIitTSs 

One or more of Bless, Demesne, Domination and Endowment 
Bless, Persistent, Puppeteer 

Nature spirits gather at ordinary occurring concentrations of 
These are the more aggressive variants of animal or monster 

animals and vegetation, and are entities of the world’s natural flora 
spirits, prowling the Spirit World looking for suitable prey. Useful to 

and fauna. 
animists of less ethical traditions, predator spirits are able to track 

Nature spirits are frequently the subject of totemic veneration 
down a particular soul, no matter the distance, and then rip the 

where an animal, particular plant or even an area of land, becomes 
victim to shreds. Unlike other spirits, Predator spirits are capable 

representative of a community — the spiritual guardian and strength 
of hunting their prey in the physical world making them perfect to 

of a tribe. Animists who devote themselves to a totem in this way 
attack targets well protected from spiritual interference. 

are always on friendly terms with spirits related to their totem, but 
Two conditions need to be filled to summon a predator spirit into 

suffer neutral or hostile reactions from other predating or preyed 
the mundane world. 

upon animal nature spirits. Likewise those that venerate a particular 
First, predator spirits require some personal effects (hair, nail 

region of deciduous forest for instance, will find that the plant spirits 
clippings, clothing, and so on) to track their prey; the effects must be 

within are friendly, but the nature spirits of neighbouring coniferous 
burned or destroyed during the ritual to summon the spirit. 

woodlands are at best neutral, if not actively hostile. 
Second the animist offers the spirit a creature of some kind as 

Nature spirits embody a myriad of different abilities depending 
part of the summoning ritual. The creature’s soul must be defeated 

on the region or creature of origin. In general such spirits should 
in spirit combat by the predator; which then dominantly possesses 

not possess more Spirit Abilities than its Intensity. It can of course 
the host’s physical body, creating a warped creature (whether physi- 

select the same ability twice, but only when affecting a different attri- 
cally or psychologically) that unerringly hunts its victim, not ceasing 

bute, skill, effect (and so on), and are restricted to things that rep- 
to sleep or eat until the prey is caught. In fact the creature will reject 

resent a quality expressed by the corporeal form(s) of the species or 
all food save the flesh, and blood of the victim they are hunting. 

plant-life. If two or more nature spirits with the same specific ability 
Predator spirits often rely on their cunning or stealth to launch 

are used at the same time by the same animist, only the stronger 
spirit will take effect. attacks, since the creature it possesses is not invulnerable to physical 

damage. As the victim usually has no warning of his fate the first 
& Bless: The spirit can boost an Attribute or skill relevant to he will know of his pursuit is the first ambush. If the predator spirit 

that totem. A leopard spirit might boost Action Points for fails to make a clean kill on its initial attack, it retreats to reassess 
example. the situation; withholding its next attempt to ensure it has a tactical 

& Demesne: The spirit controls the plant life of a particular advantage. If the victim takes flight the spirit pursues; and, because 
region. The spirit can control the growth, flowering, fruiting, it will never stop, this can cause grave distress to the prey. 
and defoliation of vegetation within range. These effects are The hunt continues until the host is killed or starves to death. At 
necessarily slow, but thanks to the vitality of the spirit, can be this stage the predator spirit can, assuming it has any Magic Points 
forced to occur out of season. remaining, attempt to possess a new creature. If defeated, or no new 

& Domination: The spirit controls behaviour of members of its host is nearby, it returns to the Spirit World freed of its obligation. 
own species. Thus a a spider spirit could exert command over Animists must consider the host creature carefully. Large animals 
every arachnid within range of its aura. are obviously more dangerous in combat, but find it difficult to enter 

& Endowment: Use a trait possessed by the totemic species, civilised places without attracting attention. Smaller creatures can 
such as a special sense or movement. For instance shark spirits pass unseen more easily, but may find it difficult to keep up if the tar- 
could grant the creature ability of Blood Sense or Swimmer, get flees, or to kill them when caught. Nothing prevents a human (or 
whilst a Lotus flower spirit might grant Venomous. humanoid) from acting as the host and, if this case, they take-on the 

wild, animalistic characteristics of a predator. This may be enough 
Nature spirits do not initiate Spirit Combat except against enemy 

of asignal to alert a target to a very big problem. 
nature spirits. 

A number of low Intensity predators can be summoned to 
Other than its POW, which is based upon its Intensity, the 

hunt as a pack — although each spirit summoning must be treated 
other Characteristics of a nature spirit match those of its corporeal 

separately. 

151



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

PRrEedDAatToORr SPpIiRrIitT very large creature may translate into a Major Wound, and possibly 

Characteristics even death when the animist returns to his original shape. 
In the latter case, iif the severity of a wound increases after the 

STR: As per Host 
spirit has been dismissed, the animist must make an unopposed 

CON: As per Host 
Endurance roll at a penalty of one skill grade per injured location, 

SIZ: As per Host 
or suffer the detrimental effects of the injury, based on its severity. 

DEX: As per Host Shape-shifting spirits are usually peaceable, and do not initiate 
INS: 2d6+6 Spirit Combat. 
POW: As per Intensity 

CHA: 1d6+6 ShHAaPpEe SHhIifFtTiInNgG SPpIirRIitT 

Skills: Characteristics 

Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, INS: As per Host 

Stealth = 50%+INS+CHA, POW: As per Intensity 
Willpower = 50%+POWx2) 

CHA: Equal to INS 
Spirit Abilities: In addition to Persistent, and Puppeteer, the spirit gains a number 

Skills: 
of Bless bonuses to its Attributes equal to its Intensity. Popular augmentations are to 

Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, 
the creature's Armour Points, Damage Modifier, and Movement Rate. 

> g Willpower = 50%-+POWx2) 

ShHAaPpEe--SHhIiFfTtIinNgG SPpIiRrIitTSs 
SIicCkKnNEeSsSs SPpIiRrIitTSs 

Shapechange Covert, Disease, Manifestation 
Shape-shifting spirits allow animists to change their physical Malevolent beings, sickness spirits inflict misery through infect- 

form into that of another creature or being — most frequently a crea- ing victims with the disease they carry. They are attracted by the 
ture or beast associated with their totem or tradition. An animist of departure of souls to the Spirit World, gathering close to the bodies 
the Great Bear Clan could, for example, use a shape-shifting spirit of the recently dead; but can also be drawn by congregations of 
to become a grizzly bear or similar ursine. other sickness spirits. Widespread plague can result from a small, 

Shape-shifting spirits must be embodied by the animist, a risky localised sickness as more, and more sickness spirits are drawn to 
practice because, like elemental spirits, shape-shifters cannot be the area. 
automatically recalled or dismissed. Lone sickness spirits lie in wait in the Spirit World waiting for 

The type of animal form a shape-shifter can adopt depends on unsuspecting mortals to approach. They then follow them until they 
the spirit’s Intensity. The greater the Intensity the bigger the crea- sleep or pass into an unconscious state. At this point the sickness 
ture. The Characteristics of creatures assumed are always those of spirit manifests, and engages the target in spirit combat. If it gains a 
an average member of that species. level of success the spirit infects the victim, and wanders off to find 

another host. Only rarely do they covertly possess a victim in order 
SPpIirRIitT InNtTEeNnSsIitTyY fFoORr SIZ oOFf CRrEeAaTtUuRrEe 

to come into contact with other mortals. 
Animists can bind sickness spirits into a fetish— and some evil 

1 7-12 shamans revel in such bindings — using them to sicken foes in direct 
13-21 combat. 
22-33 Unlike mundane diseases, those caused by spirits do not recover 

34-48 naturally even with application of the Healing skill. If the spirit has 

49-66 gone further, and maliciously possessed the victim, then not even 

67-87 the curative spells of Higher Magic will work — since unless the spirit 
is first driven out, the effects will return after the usual onset period 

88-111 
has run its course. 

High Intensity sickness spirits are not, thankfully, ubiquitous, and 
Summoning a shape-shifting spirit or calling it from a fetish 

animists very rarely have access to them. Knowledge of lethal sick- 
works as normal. Once embodied the animist must spend a Magic 

ness spirits is usually reserved to cults devoted to spreading disease. 
Point, and succeed in a Binding roll to force it back into its fetish 

Even then, a tradition will know only a handful of specific diseases, 
or return it to the Spirit Plane. This can be potentially dangerous: 

cach one an explicit spirit counting towards the tradition’s limit. 
if the animist has few Magic Points remaining, he may run out of 

Such dreadful cults are rare, and most likely the subject of sustained 
power before he can return to his own shape — trapping him in his 

attempts to eradicate them, for the good of the world. 
animal form. 

In his shifted form the animist gains the average physical Charac- 
SIicCkKnNEeSsSs SPpIiRrIitT 

teristics, Armour Points, Hit Points, Creature Abilities, and natural 
locomotion of the animal, but keeps his own skills. Physical dam- 
age sustained in the animal form is carried over between transfor- INS: 2d6 

mations (and vice-versa), although what might have been a Serious POW: As per Intensity 

Wound when shifted as a small animal may become a mere scratch CHA: 2d6 
when human. Whereas a Serious Wound suffered in the form of a 

152

~N O O = N 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

Skills: armour a wraith manifests has an Armour Point value equal to its 

Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, Intensity, but since wraiths are intangible to physical objects, these 

Stealth = 50%+INS+CHA, Armour Points only block magical damage. 

Willpower = 50%+POWx2) Wraith attacks are as intangible as the wraith itself, so unless 
parrying with a magically enhanced weapon any blow the wraith 

UNnDdEeAaTtHh SPpIiRrIitTSs inflicts passes through the defending weapon, and armour. Magical 
Animate (Dead Flesh) Armour Points reduce the wraith’s Spirit Damage by the magic’s 
Undeath spirits are the souls of dead mortals who thirst to return intensity. Wraith weapons inflict a chilling, insidious form of damage 

to the mortal world, usually by reinhabiting their own long dead which makes the wounds they inflict turn black with necrosis. Such 
body. They can often be found clustering near ancient necropolises wounds never recover naturally, but require magic to heal. 
or battlefields, relatively harmless unless summoned by an animist or Should a wraith’s opponents not possess magically enhanced 
provoked by some act of desecration. weapons, the spirit treats any parry as being an automatic failure, 

The only ability these spirits command is the ability to possess allowing the spirit the opportunity to generate Special Effects: being 
dead corpses, not necessarily their own — raising them as undead. impaled by a wraith dagger is every bit as nasty as being impaled by 
The potency of the spirit empowers the dead remains it occupies, areal one. Otherwise combat proceeds as normal save that cunning 
granting a bonus of triple its Intensity to the undead creature’s STR, wraiths will sometimes attack through an ostensibly solid object to 
and CON. It also gains the Undead creature ability. catch an opponent by surprise. 

An undeath spirit may only animate a corpse of up to their POW A wraith never initiates Spirit Combat, and is unable to pursue 
in SIZ. Once in control of a body they are loathe to return to the enemies beyond its tomb or place of death. Thus outmatched foes 
Spirit World. They are incapable of initiating Spirit Combat. always have the option of fleeing these deadly spirits. 

UNnDdEeAaTthH SPpIirRIitT WRrAaIiTthH SPpIiRrIitTSs 
Characteristics Characteristic 
INT: 2d6+6 INT: 2d6+6 

POW: As per Intensity POW: As per Intensity 

CHA: 3d6 CHA: 2d6+6 

Skills: Skills: 

Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, 

Athletics STR+DEX+40%, Willpower 50%+POWx2) 

Brawn STR+SIZ+20%, 

Endurance (CONx2)+20%, 

Evade (DEX x2)+40%, 

Perception INT+POW+30%, 

Unarmed STR+DEX+40%, 

Willpower (POWx2)+40%, 

Combat Style STR+DEX+40% 

WRrAaIiTtHhSs 
Eternal, Manifestation, Wither 
Wraiths are angry, malevolent spirits that, whilst anchored to a 

specific location, can shift between the material, and Spirit Worlds at 
will. Their anger stems from their partial confinement to the mun- 
dane world, and partial denial of the Spirit World; products of a 
vengeful desire to protect their own tombs or as the by-product of 
necromantic battlefield sorceries, wraiths are wrathful, malicious 
spirits intent on venting their grievances. 
A wraith is similar to a haunt but far more potent. A wraith that 

manifests is capable of physically harming mortal foes but remains 
intangible to physical attacks, and is vulnerable only to magic. A 
wraith has only one hit location. Reducing its Magic Points to zero 
temporarily drives the creature back to the Spirit World for 24 
hours, after which its Magic Points fully regenerate. The only way 
to permanently destroy a wraith is to pursue it into the Spirit World, 
and destroy it there. Cunning wraiths sometimes recognise animists, 
and withdraw from combat early in order to preserve their Magic 
Points for potential Spirit Combat. 

It is typical for a wraith to manifest as it appeared in life, dis- 
playing its arms, and armour. They fight using their Spectral Com- 
bat skill inflicting their Spirit Damage on a successful attack. The 

153



