Mythras:  Characters

oy X 2 o % o F WKW M &K K F A | IS L = < <G| 

Characters

oy X 2 o % o F WKW MK K EX M T XN 

his chapter outlines the initial steps for Character Creation. 
CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr COoNnCcEePpTt 

The following chapters provide additional detail, but the 
T A good place to start is to have some idea of what sort of charac- 

essentials are found here. 
ter you want to play; a hardened warrior for example, or a cunning 

Every player in MYTHRAS controls a character. A character is the 
thief. Your character concept does not need to be elaborate at this 

player’s alter-ego, his role in the game, and is usually very different, 
stage; simply an idea that will help guide certain choices such as 

physically and mentally, to the player. MYTHRAS characters can be 
race and profession. A few character ideas are listed to provoke your 

from a variety of races — although humans are probably the most 
imagination. 

common, and certainly the best choice for beginning players — and 
every race is defined in the same way. &' Fierce barbarian hunter 

The basic character is defined by a series of different elements « Young, naive wizard 
that describe the character’s capabilities. These elements are: &K Bad-tempered gemstone miner 

&K Chivalrous, yet disgraced champion 
& Characteristics: such as Strength or Charisma 

& Suspicious, spiril-worshipping shaman 
& Attributes: things like Height or Movement 

& Overly-curious explorer-scholar 
& Standard Skills: expertise in fundamental abilities which 

&K Unscrupulous mercenary 
everyone shares 

Most of these elements are described in terms of numbers, and 
some are dependent on or calculated by others. What each element NoNn-HUuMmAaNn SPpEeCcIiEeSs 
means, and how they are determined, is described in the following Humans are the easiest characters to play and are probably the 
sections. most common race found in most MYTHRAS campaigns, but one need 

not be confined to just humans. It is possible to play just about any 
sapient species because all creatures, regardless of type, are defined 
in the same way. The Creatures chapter offers a number of alterna- 

DEesiIgGnNiInNgG A tives along with detailed character creation options for non-human 

CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr species. However, if this is your first MYTHRAS character, stick with 
the rules for humans given in this chapter before branching out into 

Characters are usually recorded on a character sheet, which is 
something more exotic. 

a handy way of organizing all the information about the charac- 
ter. A blank character sheet is included on pages 302-303, but it 
is recommended that you first design your character using scratch 
paper, and then transfer the information to a character sheet once CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCcSs 
you have gone through each step of the character creation process. Every sapient creature, be it human, elder race, or monster, is 
Work through each element one step at a time before proceeding to defined by seven characteristics. Each characteristic tells you some- 
the next. Use a pencil and have an eraser handy; certain numbers thing about your character; how strong or fast he or she is; how 
such as skill values will change several times during the character clever or healthy. Characteristics are at the core of every MYTHRAS 
creation process. 

Iv] 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

character;, and form the basis for most of the other elements such as ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Attributes and Skills. The seven characteristics are: The cover of this book shows a_female warrior, Anathaym, battling for 

& Strength (STR) her life against a creature intent on killing her. ‘T hroughout MyTHRAS we’ll 
be using Anathaym as an example of a character and, through her;, showing 

« Constitution (CON) 
& Size (SIZ) how the MYTHRAS rules work. Her saga begins here, with character creation. 

& Dexterity (DEX) Emma, the player is creating her furst MYTHRAS character and has already 
decided that she will call her Anathaym. Emma’s Games Master;, Steve, has 

& Intelligence (INT) 
& Power (POW) lold all the players that hus MrTHRAS campaign will be set in a fantasy world 

& Charisma (CHA) based heavily on ancient Greece, so Emma and her fellow players, Dave, 
Colin, ando, know a little about the world their characters will inhabit, and 

Before calculating the characteristics, the following section how to picture 1. 
explains what each represents. Anathaym’s world centres on a city-state called Meeros. The rules exam- 

ples make mention of Meeros frequently, its inhabitants and general culture 
StTrReEnNgGtThH (SSTTR)) (which @s late Bronze Age). Meeros’s enemaes are the barbarians known as 

STR represents physical strength: how much one can lift, how the Badoste Warlords. 
hard one can hit, and so on. Characters with a high STR As well as Anathaym several other example characters are used: Kara 
are likely to be more heavily muscled whilst those with a - Anathaym’s sister and a priestess; Zamotlas - Anathaym’s combat tutor; 
low STR are somewhat on the scrawny side. STR is a Xenos - A Meerish warrior and Anathaym’s hated rival; Kratos - A sorcerer 
component of the Damage Modifier (see page 9). If bent on destroying Meeros; Mju - a wandering mystic of the plateau desert 
a character is reduced to zero STR he lacks the abil- nomads. 
ity to move or lift objects, becoming bedridden until Meeros is used simply as a backdrop for the rules examples; the world 
STR improves somehow (through natural healing or @5 not developed beyond these illustrations, and it does not form a MryTHRAS 
magic, for example). default setting. Games Masters can, of course, use Meeros in their own games 

developing it as they need if they so desire. 
CoonnssTtiitutioonN (CCOON)) 
CON is measure of health and hardiness. 

Dexterity (DEX)
Those with a high CON are physically tough, exteriTY D ) 

Agility, balance, and reflexes are measured by DEX. Char- 
and likely to be more resistant to disease or 

acters with high DEX are fast, nimble, and graceful of move- 
poison. Those with a low CON are less resil- 

ment. Those with a low DEX tend to be lumbering and 
ient, and may be prone to sickness and tire 
quickly. CON is a component in deter- clumsy. DEX is an important aspect of Action Points (see 

mining Hit Points (see page 10), and page 8), and Initiative Bonus (see page 10). If a character 
is reduced to zero DEX they suffer functional paralysis, 

Healing Rate (see page 9). If CON falls 
unable to move until the situation is rectified. 

to zero for any reason the character 
dies. 

InNtTeElLlLiIgGeEnNcCEe (IINNT)) 
INT is measurement of cognitive ability. It indicates 

Size (SI1Z) 
the capacity for a character to think both logically and 

SIZ measures mass and helps indicate 
height and weight. The larger the SIZ the creatively. Those with a lower IN'T' score are not neces- 

heavier or bigger the creature is likely to sarily stupid, but they are likely to be constrained in how 
creatively they can employ their wits. Creatures with an 

be. Most creatures” SIZ has a higher min- 
INT of 7 or below are considered sentient, retaining ani- 

imum value than other characteristics, 
mal level instinct, and able to react to stimuli. Individu- 

representing the smallest example of an 
als with an IN'T" of 8 or higher are deemed fully sapi- 

adult of that race; which in the case 
ent. INT is a factor in calculating Action Points (see 

of humans is 8. SIZ is used to help 
figure Hit Points (see page 10), as page 8), and Initiative Bonus (see page 10). If INT is 

larger, heavier creatures tend to f; reduced to zero the character becomes completely 
mindless. 

have greater endurance against 
damage. SIZ can also be used 

Poweer (PPOOW)) 
to determine a character’s Dam- 

Power is a measurement of a character’s soul, 
age Modifier, since mass helps to 

spirit, inner drive, and capacity for magic. It 
increase the force of a blow. SIZ 

encompasses a number of different things and 
provides rough limits to Height 

is a relatively abstract measurement, but is also 
and Weight, depending on the 

one of the most important. POW is the charac- 
character’s body frame (see page 9). 

teristic that marks a character out to the gods 
If SIZ drops below the species min- 

or other supernatural powers, and is an 
imum they are considered to have 

indication of divine or magical poten- 
wasted away to the point they are 

tial, as well as being an indication of 
bedridden. 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

the force of their personal determination. POW governs a charac- 
PooiiNnnTts Buiildp 

ter’s Magic Points (see page 10), and Luck Points (see page 10). If a 
Instead of rolling dice to determine characteristics, players build 

character’s POW ever drops to zero they lose all independent will. 
their character from a preset pool of 80 points. Certain rules apply 

CHhAaRrIisSmMaA (CCHA)) to the points build option: 

Charisma measures personality, and is independent of physical 
« 1 point in a characteristic costs 1 Point from the Points Build 

appearance. Someone with a high CHA for example, might be ugly 
pool 

or plain to look at, but blessed with a charm and wit that more than 
& Characteristics cannot be lwer than the minimum value or 

compensates for not being handsome. Likewise a low CHA might 
greater than maximum value of that characteristic 

indicate someone who is radiantly beautiful but utterly shallow or 
& All Characteristic Points must be used in the design process. 

simply meek. A good CHA is often useful for those who wish to 
Points cannot be held over or used for anything else. 

be leaders or centres of their local community. Diehard loners and 
submissive followers tend towards the other extreme. CHA affects 
a character’s Experience Modifier (see page 9). If CHA is ever falls 
to zero, the character can no longer socially interact with others, 
becoming so painfully shy or antisocial they are ignored or even ATtTtRrIibBUuTtEeSs 
driven away. Each character also has a set of attributes. These are particular 

capabilities derived from the characteristics, or determined by them 
that are used to govern certain factors of game play. The attributes 
are: 

CAaLlCcUuLlAaTtIinNgG 
& Action Points 

CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCcSs & Damage Modifier 

Fach characteristic has a numerical value to determine how & Experience Modifier 

potent it is. Characteristic values can be calculated in one of several « Healing Rate 

ways; either by random dice rolls or by allocating a predetermined & Height and Weight 
number of points. Which method to be used is governed by the « Hit Points 
Games Master. & Tnitiative Bonus 

Games Masters are free to modify rolling techniques or values to & Luck Points 

suit their own campaigns. For instance if the Games Master wished & Magic Points 

randomly rolled player characters to be more heroic, or at least & Movement Rate 

free from handicap, he could permit the re-roll of an unusually low 
result; or allow the player to take up to three points from one char- ACcTtIioOnN POoIiNnTtSs 
acteristic, and assign them to another providing the new scores do How often a character can act in a combat round (see the Com- 
not exceed the normal characteristic range; or even permit one of bat chapter) is determined by Action Points. How they are used is 
the dice used to roll each characteristic to be substituted for its full discussed in more detail on page 91, but to determine a character’s 
value. Likewise if using point allocation, a character can simply be base number of Action Points take the sum of INT and DEX, and 
assigned a larger pool of characteristic points. consult the chart below: 

By default, the options listed below are suggested. 
AccTtIioOnN POoIiNnTtSs 

Diice RoollLl,, InN ORrDdEeRr INT+ DEX Action Points 

Roll the indicated dice for STR, CON, SIZ, DEX, INT, POW 12 or Less 1 

and CHA taking each rolled score as it comes. Since the results of 13-24 2 

these rolls can be somewhat random, it is often better to decide on 25-36 3 

a character concept after the dice are rolled. Otherwise the final Tor every additional 12 points +1 

characteristics may preclude a preconceived role. 
The dice used depends on the creature or race chosen. For 

humans roll 3d6 for STR, CON, DEX, POW and CHA; then The Reasons Why... 
2d6+6 for SIZ and INT. Other species use the dice listed against 
their entry in the Creatures chapter. & INT: Clever characters can more easily exploit openings, and opportuni- 

ties that lend them an edge in combat 

Diice RooLlLl,, AssssIigGnN & DEX: Agile characters react more quickly and can therefore act more 
often during combat 

As above, except that the player may exchange values between 
characteristics with the same dice range. For example when rolling 
up a human, the player could swap values between the STR, CON, DAaMmAaGgEe MOoDIdFifIiEeRr 
DEX, POW and CHA characteristics which share a 3d6 range, or The bonus amount of damage a character inflicts when they 

between the SIZ and INT characteristics with their 2d6+6 range — physically strike or apply force. It is generally used in combat sit- 

but never switch over rolls from one group to the other. uations, but can also be utilised when attempting to break objects. 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

The damage modifier is an extra die roll which is either added to, The Reasons Why... 
or subtracted from, the damage inflicted by the weapon or tool. If a 

& CHA: charismatic characters possess greaterforce of personality and the 
negative damage modifier takes a weapon’s damage to zero or below 

ability to encourage co-operationfrom friends, comrades, and peers 
then no damage at all has been inflicted. 

Add together STR and SIZ, and consult the Damage Modifier 
HEeAaLlIinNgG RAaTtEe 

table: 
After receiving injuries, a character needs to recuperate. Healing 

DAaMmAaGgEe MOoDIdFifIiEerR Rate determines how quickly they naturally recover from wounds. 
Depending on the severity of the injury (see page 80), the Healing 

STR + SIZ Damage Modifier 
Rate denotes how many Hit Points are recovered per day, week or 

5or Less —1d8 
month. 

6-10 -1d6 

11-15 —1d4 HEeAaLlIinNgG RAaTtEe 

16-20 ~-1d2 
CON Healing Rate 

21-25 +0 6 or Less 1 

26-30 +1d2 7-12 2 
31-35 +1d4 13-18 3 
36-40 +1d6 Each 6 points +1 
41-45 +1d8 

46-50 +1d10 

51-60 +1d12 HEeIigGhHTt AanNDd WEeIigGHhTt 
A character’s height and weight depend on two things: SIZ, and 

61-70 +2d6 
the character’s body frame. Three body frames are provided; lithe 

71-80 +1d8+1d6 
(slender, athletic, underweight), medium, and heavy (broad shoul- 

81-90 +2d8 
dered, barrel-chested, overweight). Players are free to pick their 

91-100 +1d10+1d8 
preferred frame depending on how they envisage the character. If 

101-110 +2d10 non-humans are being created, race may limit the choice of body 
111-120 +2d10+1d2 frame. 
121-130 +2d10+1d4 

HEeIigGhHTt aAnNDd WEeIiGgHhTt 
Each 10 points Continue Progression 

N /A Height (cm) Lithe (Kg) Medium (Kg) Heavy (Kg) 

1 1-45 1-5 1-7 1-9 

The Reasons Why... 2 46-80 6-10 8-14 10-18 

3 81-105 11-15 15-21 19-27 
& STR: stronger characlers can apply more bruteforce 

4 106-120 16-20 22-28 28-36 
&K SIZ: greater size usually indicates greater mass or leverage 

5 121-130 21-25 29-35 37-45 

EXxPpEeRrIieEnNcCEe MOoDIdFifIiEeRr 6 131-140 26-30 36-42 46-54 

Over the course of play characters improve their skills and capa- 7 141-150 31-35 43-49 55-63 
bilities. This is achieved through the use of Experience Rolls which 8 151-155 36-40 50-56 64-72 
are explained in more detail on page 71. 

9 156-160 41-45 57-63 73-81 
A character’s CHA score may adjust the number of Experience 

10 161-165 46-50 64-70 82-90 
Rolls the character has, reflecting the relationship he has with his 

11 166-170 51-55 71-77 91-99 
peers, and his reputation in his community. If CHA is high peo- 
ple are willing to put themselves out to help train or support the 12 171-175 56-60 78-84 100-108 

character whilst they undergo tuition. Conversely, if CHA is partic- 13 176-180 61-65 85-91 109-117 

ularly low, there may be some difficulty improving one’s capabilities 14 181-185 66-70 92-98 118-126 

without the assistance of others; finding someone to spar against for 15 186-190 71-75 99-105 127-135 

example. 16 191-195 76-80 106-112 136-144 

17 196-200 81-85 113-119 145-153 

18 201-205 86-90 120-126 154-162 
EXxPpEeRrIieEnNCcEe MOoDIdFifIiEeRr 

19 206-210 91-95 127-133 163-171 
CHA Exp. Modifier 

20 211-215 96-100 134-140 172-180 
6 or Less -1 

21 216-220 101-105 141-147 181-189 
7-12 0 

Each point +5 cm +5 Kg +7 Kg +9 Kg 
13-18 +1 

Each 6 points +1 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

Hiit PoiiNnTts PEeRr LoOCcAaTtIioOnN                                                         CONN++SSIIZ 
Location 1-5 6-10 11-15 16-20 21-25 26-30 31-35 36-40 +5 pts 
Leg 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 +1 
Abdomen 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 +1 
Chest 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 +1 
Each Arm 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 +1 
Head 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 +1 

To calculate height and weight, which is measured in centimetres Luck POoIiNnTtSs 
and kilos, cross reference SIZ with the body frame selected. The Luck Points represent that strange force differentiating adven- 
result is a range of values that your character’s height and weight turing heroes from everyday folk. Call it fate, karma or simple good 
falls into. You should choose the actual value from within this range. fortune. Luck Points can be used to: 

The Height and Weight table can, of course, be used to deter- 
mine the physical properties of anything, but is primarily designed & Re-roll the dice, if they are unfavourable 

to reflect humanoids. Other creatures however can have more & Mitigate physical damage or other unfortunate circumstances 

extreme body frames beyond those given here. See the Creatures & Gain an edge at a vital moment in combat 

chapter, page 224. 
Exactly how they are used, and when, is described on page 81. 

HiiTt POoIiNnTtSs 
Once a Luck Point is spent, the pool decreases; when one is out 

Hit Points represent how much injury an area of the body can 
of Luck Points, no more are available — unless the Games Master 

withstand before it becomes useless, possibly resulting in incapacita- 
makes an impromptu award — until the next game session when they 

tion, and ultimately the character’s death. The body of every crea- 
replenish to their normal value. 

ture is divided into separate locations — humans for example have 
seven; the head, chest, abdomen, arms, and legs — each location with 

Luck PoiiNnTts 
its own hit points. 

POW Luck Points 
Some creatures, such as monsters or different classes of animal, 

6 or Less 1 
by their very nature often have radically different body structures, 
yet each location they possess still has Hit Points. When a location’s 7-12 2 

hit points are reduced to a certain level through damage of any 13-18 3 

kind, then the character suffers certain consequences that reflect the Each 6 points +1 

severity of the injury. For further information concerning wounds 
The Reasons Why... 

see page 80. 
& POW: power is a measure of luck and divine favour; a gift of 

To calculate the Hit Points of each location, add CON and SIZ 
fate, or the ability to cheat it 

together and cross-reference on the Hit Points table. 

The Reasons Why... 
MaAaggGic PoIiNnTts 

& CON: healthy, resilient individuals can withstand more punishment than Mystical abilities and spells cast in MYTHRAS usually rely on 

Sraler ones Magic Points. Since the availability of magic may be limited by a 

&K SIZ: greater bulk helps absorb damage, and reduce the significance of campaign setting or to specific magical professions, some characters 

an tmjury will find this Attribute superfluous. 
Tor those who can utilise such powers, a character’s Magic Points 

are equal to their POW. These points are used to cast spells, the cost 
InNIitTiIaAtTIivVeE BOoNnUuSs of which is dependent on the type of magic used. When the caster 

The moment at which someone reacts in combat is governed 
runs out of Magic Points he has exhausted his ability to cast any 

by initiative. Initiative Bonus acts as a modifier to initiative rolls; 
spells until they are replenished. 

the higher the bonus, the faster one responds in a combat situation, 
determining when you can act. FFurther factors — armour for exam- The Reasons Why... 
ple — modify it. The Combat chapter goes into more detail on how 

& POW: Power is a measure of both willpower — used to command the 
Initiative works (see page 90). 

magical fabric — and the psychic strength the character channels from 
Initiative Bonus is the average of the DEX and INT 

their environment 
characteristics. 

The Reasons Why... MOoVvEeMmEeNnTt RAaTtEe 
Movement is not calculated from Characteristics but is a default 

K INT: clever fighters can predict attacks and anticipate their opponent’s value which differs between species. The base Movement Rate for 
strategies humans is 6 metres, although certain skills can improve this. The 

& DEX: faster characters react and respond more quickly than slower ones section on Movement, on page 69 offers more detail. 

10



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

TANDARD KILLS ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Standard Skills Emma prepares to create Anathaym, a human adventuress. The cam- 

By default, every Adventurer has a range of Standard skills paign uses the assigned dice 10ll method, so characteristic rolls are madef urst, 
allowing him to perform a variety of actions with varying degrees of and then allocated to the characteristics as the players wish. Emma rolls the 
expertise. These skills are detailed more fully in the Skills chapter, Jollowing on 3d6: 11, 7, 15, 9, and 16. Since humans calculate therr SIZ 
but cover a range of everyday activities and local knowledge which and INT using different dice, she then rolls 2d6+6 twice, and gans a 10 
anyone can use without specialised training. At this point of charac- and 14. After some thought Emma assigns them thus: STR 11, CON 13, 
ter creation, players will only need to know the base values of each SIZ 10, DEX 16, INT 14, POW7, CHA 9 
Standard skill. For a human, Anathaym s of average strength, andf airly hardy. She is 

The basic score of each Standard skill is determined by the sum small, reasonably smart, yet ts somewhat unlucky. On the other hand she has 
of two characteristics or a multiple of a single characteristic. The excellent reflexes. Last but by no means least, her charisma s a little below 
value represents the character’s innate competence in a given area, average, probably indicating she is slightly shy. 
in effect their raw talent before any formative training received as Characteristics assigned, Emma now figures Anathaym’s attributes. 
part of his culture and profession. 

The Standard Skills Table shows how the basic values are cal- Action Points: with INT and DEX totaling 30, Anathaym has 3 
culated, along with a brief description of what the skill is and does. Action Points. She can think and act quickly in perilous situations. 
The score represents the percentage chance of success for a skill; so, Damage Bonus: Anathaym’s STR 11 and SIS 10 give a lotal of 
an Athletics score of 25 is expressed as 25%. How skill percentages 21, which means she has no Damage Bonus. Although Anathaym has a small 
work, and more detailed skill descriptions are provided in the Skills plysique, her strength partially counteracts her stature, preventing any loss of 
chapter. power when attempting to damage something 

Note that the basic percentages for some skills will be modified Experience Modifier: Anathaym’s CHA 9 resulls in no Experience 
by both culture and profession, so these starting values will change Modifier. Anathaym s somewhat unassuming, finding it a little difficult to 
as character creation progresses. makef riends and accept others into her trust. 

Healing Rate: Anathaym’s CON 13 results in a Healing Rate of 3. 
StTaAnNdDAaRrdD SKkIiLlLlSs 

Wihilst unexceptional in terms of size and strength, Anathaym healsfrom her 
Skill Basic Percentage wounds quickly. 
Athletics STR+DEX Height & Weight: Emma has decided that she would like Anathaym 

Boating STR+CON lo be slender. So she cross references Anathaym’s SIS on the Lithe column_for 
her Weight. At SI 10 she s between 161 and 165 centimetres tall— Emma 

Brawn STR+SIZ 
seltles on 165 — and she weighs between 46 and 50 kilos. Emma decides 

Conceal DEX+POW 
that Anathaym is at the lower end of the scale, and opts for 47kg Emma 

Clustoms INTx2 
reasons that Anathaym s willowy to the point of looking ascetically thin— an 

Dance DEX+CHA 
appearance which leads many to underestimate her. 

Deceit INT+CHA Hit Points: CON 13 and SIZ 10 means Anathaym’s Hit Points will 
Drive DEX+POW be average, her hardiness compensating for her small, slight frame. Adding 
Endurance CON x2 CON and SIZ gwes a result of 25 which denotes that she has 5 Hit Points 
Evade DEX x2 in her Head and Legs, 7 in her Chest, 6 in her abdomen, and 4 in her Arms. 

First Aid INT+DEX Anathaym is tougher than she looks. 

Influence CHA x2 Initiative Bonus: With INT 14 and DEX 16, Anathaym has a 
Initiatwe Bonus of 15. She ofien actsf irst in combat, seizing the initiative. 

Insight INT+POW 
Luck Points: Anathaym has a POW of 7 which grants her 2 Luck 

Locale INT x2 
Points. Thus, twice a game session, she can call upon these Luck Points to aid 

Native Tongue INT+CHA 
her in a variety of different ways. 

Perception INT+POW POW 7 gives Anathaym only 7 Magic Points. She wsn’t particularly 

Ride DEX+POW concerned; she’s smart and agile, and those traits are more important to her. 

Sing CHA+POW 

Stealth DEX+INT Anathaym’s Standard Skills work out as follows: 
Athletics 27 %, Boating 24%, Brawn 21%, Customs 28%, Dance 

Swim STR+CON 
25%, Deceit 23%, Drive 23%, Endurance 26%, Evade 32%, Fist Aid 

Unarmed STR+DEX 
30%, Influence 18%, Insight 21%, Locale 28%, Native Tongue 25%, 

Willpower POW x2 
Perception 21 %, Ride 25%, Sing 16%, Sleight 25%, Stealth 30 %, Swim 
24%, Unarmed 27 %, Willpower 14%. 

Clearly at this stage her weakest Standard Skill ts Willpower, reflecting 
her shyness and lack of self-confidence; whereas her best s Evade indicating 
Anathaym’s natural grace and coordination. These raw talents will bef urther 
improved by her cultural upbringing and chosen profession as described in the 
Jollowing two chapters. 

11



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 
A Combat Style is the skill relating to fighting and the use of 

weapons. It is a diverse skill with many specialisations related to 
the culture or profession which teaches it. Most fighting traditions 
encompass training in multiple weapons, along with the techniques 
required to use them all effectively, whether singly or in combi- 
nation. In addition they often assume a situational element, such 
as fighting as close order infantry or whilst mounted. Therefore a 
Combat Style is an umbrella skill that melds together many related 
aspects of fighting under a single ability, removing the need to pur- 
chase multiple sub skills. 

All Combat Styles have a Basw Percentage equal to STR+DEX. 
Since most people can pick up a weapon and instinctively either 

swing, throw or fire it, Combat Styles are considered Standard Skills. 
Yet due to their potentially diverse nature, they are categorised and 
defined separately, under names suitable to the genre of the game 
setting. 

For example, a campaign centred on professional gladiators, where set-piece 
bouts between conflicting weapon techniques is important, a character might learn 
the Combat Style (Retiarius) or Combat Style (Murmallo); whereas a travelling 
merchant campaign mightf eature wandering tribesmen with Combat Style (Horse 
Nomad) instead. The precise weapons covered by a particular style are normally 
defined by the Games Master (forfurther details see Combat page 88). 

Characters learn Combat Styles as part of their culture and pro- 
fession, as described in the following two chapters. 

12



