Mythras:  Theism

| G S [ S L L I 11 K 7 K LU SO GO << A o IR UL AR | < < 

Theism

>, > 
=% X = A % &W = K 7 K I& A << A o B B T <= B = Gl 

T heism is the belief in, and worship of, godlike beings; it calls 
upon them to create supernatural effects on behalf of their CAaLlLlIinNgG oONn TthHEe GOoDdSs 

T faithful adherents. The precise manner in which this magic Calling upon the gods for their power relies upon two core skills, 
is provided, and how it manifests can vary dramatically according to Devotion and Exhort. Devotion reflects the strength and depth of 
the setting, but at its heart is the concept that worshippers appease the bond between the theist and his deity, or deities; whilst Exhort 
deities with gifts and devotion, in exchange for which the entity lends is the ability of the worshipper to correctly intonate or phrase his 
certain mortals, who have been initiated into its cult, the right to call requests, so that his divine patron will respond. 
upon a part of its power. 

Worshippers do not study the art of manipulating magic; rather 
DeevvooTtioonN (PPOOW+CHAA)) 

they learn the myths and secrets of those they venerate, gaining 
The nature and strength of any miraculous powers a theist draws 

insight into their nature, personalities and desires. With this knowl- 
upon is based upon his Devotion. The ‘skill’ is more accurately a 

edge a devoted worshipper knows how to phrase or frame a request 
relationship the theist has with an individual god, a small faction or 

to his gods, so that they feel compelled, or indeed inspired, to help 
family of divine beings, or indeed an entire pantheon. The precise 

him. 
scope of the skill depends upon the campaign setting, but each inci- 

Additionally a worshipper must show his dedication to his divine 
dence of Devotion must be assigned to a specific deity or group of 

patrons by offering sacrifice, service, and perhaps even selfless ado- 
deities. 

ration in order to prove himself worthy of their attention. The depth 
It is the depth of the worshipper’s Devotion to his gods which 

of this piety influences the amount of effort to which deities will 
grants potency to any theistic miracles he calls for. Whenever a theist 

move themselves in order to aid a loyal devotee. 
requests aid from a deity, the Magnitude and Intensity of the miracle 

Since the divine status of a worshipped entity is often based upon 
is equal to one tenth of his Devotion score. 

the worship it receives, deities are motivated to watch over their sup- 
Devotion is often utilised to measure the progression of a wor- 

plicants. This is done in a myriad of ways, from commanding its 
shipper within a cult, the upper echelons being restricted to those 

most devoted priests to establish cults or temples —which in turn pro- 
who demonstrate the proper dedication. This in turn can limit what 

vide materialistic support to its worshippers within a community — to 
miracles are available to a worshipper of particular cult rank; as 

clevating zealots as figureheads of high political or military status, by 
few religions are likely to grant their most potent powers to mere 

providing them with potent powers. 
initiates. 

Worship is the fundamental keystone of this divine (or perhaps 
Last but by no means least, in the right circumstances Devotion 

infernal) magical ecology. The more worship, or propitiation, a deity 
can potentially be used to resist various psychological attacks, tests of 

receives, the more magical might it garners; which in turn must be 
faith or contests of competing passions. 

given back or used to aid its supplicants or else risk losing their faith- 
ful attendance. 

Not every being who receives worship is necessarily a god per se. ExhHOoRrTt (IINNTT++CCHA)) 
One man’s deity may be another man’s demon. In fact nothing pre- Exhort is the skill used to coerce the gods to send a worshipper 

vents the creation of a theistic culture which venerates monstrous, the magical aid he requires. It can be portrayed in several ways, but 

alien beings from other dimensions. Providing these beings - no mat- combines a number of different aspects such as strength of passion, 

ter their origin — are fed, entertained or placated in the correct man- egocentric will, ritualistic knowledge and understanding of divine 

ner they will channel their power through those who please them. psychology, to put forth a request which the deity cannot ignore. 

178



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

Mechanistically the skill works as a simple base chance to suc- 
cessfully channel power from the god. A theist with Exhort (Lord AccCtTiInNgG LiIkke Your Gopd 
Dark Maggot) 70% has a 70% chance of performing the relevant In some settings, as hus Devotion increases, so does the propensity of 

miracle. the worshupper to act in the ways the focus of that veneration acts. This 

Exactly how a miracle manifests can vary dramatically according may not be due to any supernatural link, merely the pressures of cult mem- 

to the setting. A successful exhortation can impel the deity to either: bershap, voluntary geases or even social expectation. Whatever the source 
of the influence, a worshipper’s behaviour or judgment can begin to reflect 

& Channel his knowledge and power through the theist those of his god, potentially leading to gradual personality changes. 
& Cast the miracle on the theist’s behalf 1t 15 believed by many cults that their gods are more able, or at least 
& Manifest before the theist (and all observers) to perform the more willing, to aid those who espouse their divine patron’s virtues. Acting 

deed personally in a manner contrary lo a god’s desires can land that worshupper in deep 
trouble. Much depends on the nature of the bond between theust and deity; 

Taking the case of the Demon Lord Ningilin as an illustration, 
whether it can be an informal relationship, or if the strength of the tie 

a worshipper who successfully called upon him to destroy a group 
demands a worshipper behave precisely bike the god in order to maintain 

of sacrilegious enemies with his power of wormy transformation, 
the flow of magical power between them. 

might find that the god grants the worshipper the words of invo- 
cation and magical strength to cast the magic himself; or that the N ' 
miracle simply occurs without further effort on the worshipper’s 
part; or most worryingly of all, that Ningilin himself steps down STtaARrTtIinNgG THhEeIiSsTtSs 
from the sky, and personally transforms the interlopers with his own A character that begins the game as a theist must choose a single 
putrescent hands. cult to follow; either designed by the Games Master, agreed between 

the player and Games Master, or chosen from the examples given in 
the Cults and Brotherhoods chapter. Only one cult can be chosen 

Cuurlts aAnNDd MIiRrAaCcLlEeSs at this stage but others can potentially be joined during the course 
of play. 

A theist’s skills are indelibly linked to a specific religion, normally 
Theist characters start with knowing those miracles available to 

organised and known as a cult. Most cults are ancient faiths and 
someone of their cult rank, but not exceeding a number equal to 

usually accepted — or at least tolerated — by the local culture. Some 
one twentieth of their Devotion skill. Once the game begins they are 

are limited to a single city or tribe, whereas others can span nations. 
restricted in what additional powers they can learn, and when they 

Even the number of deities incorporated within a cult can vary, with 
can learn them. 

some cults tied to a single divine being, whereas others can consol- 
idate an entire pantheon. In fact a single deity could have a dozen 
different, independent cults devoted to various aspects of its celestial LeEaArRnNIinNgG MIiRrAaCcLlEeSs 
magnificence! The costs of learning new miracles are based upon an invest- 

It is a cult’s deities which provide the miracles available to dedi- ment of Experience Rolls as described in the Magic chapter on page 

cated worshippers. Correspondingly there are no preset restrictions 118. However, most priesthoods restrict the availability of certain 

to the number of miracles each cult has, nor even that they should miracles according to cult rank, ensuring that worshippers prove 

be balanced to one another. In general, the powers offered by the their devotion and loyalty before trusting them with such knowledge. 

cult reflect the nature of that deity or deities venerated. The only Even the achievement of promotion within the cult does not neces- 

thing which is fairly certain is that the cult’s own priesthood will limit sarily grant a character automatic access to any new powers. 

the availability of what miracles to which it has access, to those of Learning miracles may require the theist to prove himself wor- 

proven faith and trustworthiness. thy in a number of different ways, depending on the nature of the 

For example the Cult of Myceras, war god of Meeros, may grant access to cult. Some require the completion of a heroic quest to attest their 

the maracles Beast Form, Berserk, Clear Skies, Consecrate, Fortyfy, Sacred Band, faith or a pilgrimage to seek out a holy spot where their god myth- 

Shield and Sunspear. Whilst the Cult of the Seven Badoshi Devils might instead ically gained that particular power; whilst others might necessitate 

provide Bind Ghost, Chameleon, Consecrate, Earthquake, Madness, Perseverance the slaying of a worthy sacrifice, or a superior to demonstrate their 

and True Scimitar;, each of the seven demigods providing one of the miracles. right to this secret knowledge, or going into seclusion for many weeks 

Thus cults, like other magical organisations, are similar to Com- inhaling mind-expanding narcotics to seek oneness with their deity. 

bat Styles: diverse combinations of deities and miracles amalgam- Thus learning how to call upon new miracles is rarely just a pro- 

ated into a single faith. Since cults are often viewed as the patrons saic case of paying enough silver to convince the priesthood — as that 

of particular careers or irrevocably bound to specific philosophies, is how lay members engage the services of priests to cast miracles on 

it may be unusual for a worshipper to pay more than lip service to their behalf. To gain these potent powers for themselves, characters 

more than one faith. must undergo great challenges and moral dilemmas, binding them- 

Professional theists who serve the shrines and temples of a cult selves closer to the cult and the deities they revere. 

are often well regarded, if not feared, for their zealous beliefs; and 
take the trouble to dress, act and behave appropriately to properly 
revere their patron gods. 

179



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

KAaRrAa'’Ss SaAgGaA JoOIinNiInNgG MOoRrEe ThHAaNn ONnEe Curlt 
Kara begins the campaign by joining the priesthood of Myceras, specially If the campaign setting permits, nothing prevents membership 

selectedfrom the virginal dancing girls who entertain the god on holy days with of multiple cults, providing they are not the antithesis of each other. 
thewr passionate war dances. Whether her excluswe mnvitation was due to the Tor instance it may be reasonable for characters to be members of 
political machinations of her father to save her from the lechery of Xenos, or a state religion and a professional cult, and still worship a family 
whether the god himself expressed an interest due to her beauty and dedication, deity. In such cases a separate devotional pool must be maintained 
Kara does not know, for each individual cult. 

In exchangefor an oath of abstinence andf authful service, she us inducted However, there is a limit to how much magical energy can be 
into the Cult of Myceras as an initate. Much of her time 15 spent clearing up amassed. No matter how many cults they are members of, the com- 
the mess produced by the incessant sacrificial offerings requested by the city’s bined amount of Magic Points stored in the pools cannot exceed the 
warrwrs, yet during the evenings she us taught the ways of worshup. By the time POW of the character. Attempting to do so results in Magic Points 
the game starts she has a Devotion of 63 % and has learned allfour of those dissipating from the other pools until the stored total once again 
cult miracles which Myceras provides to Initiates (1 muraclefor each 20% or equals the theist’s POW. 
theregf of her skill). 

DOoNnAaTtIinNGg MAaGgIiCc POoIiNnTtSs 
Dedicating Magic Points to their devotional pool requires that 

UssIinNgG THhEeIisSmM the theist be present at a shrine, temple or holy place with con- 
nection to the cult’s god or pantheon. The ritual takes the form of 

A theist may call upon some of the most potent magical effects 
ceremony, meditation or prayer, and often incorporates some type 

available to mortal magicians. However, their exhortations require 
of offering above and beyond the pure Magic Points — perhaps an 

much preparation, primarily in the form of worshipping and making 
animal sacrifice, financial tribute to the priesthood or a gift pleasing 

dedications to the gods. These religious acts are normally restricted 
to the deity. 

to places deemed sacrosanct, so the reach of a cultis often limited to 
The actual source of the Magic Points can be somewhat abstract 

the locales close by shrines, temples or particular holy sites dedicated 
(see Where do Magic Points Come From? page 115). For example, if 

to the deity or deities in question. 
Magic Points come from sacrificial offerings, then the theist himself 
must orchestrate, or at least participate in, the offering. The import- 

DeevvoTtiioNnAaLl PooLls ant concept here is that a worshipper must be physically present at 
Ciult members who advance beyond the cult rank of Lay Member the donation, else the Magic Points generated do not transfer to his 

may begin to draw upon the gods by use of the Exhort skill. Every devotional pool. 
miracle they call for must be paid for in advance of the request, by It is recommended that the current number of Magic Points in 
sacrifice or donation of Magic Points into something called a devo- the pool cannot exceed the size of the most recent donation. Thus a 
tional pool. This pool represents the strength of the bond between theist with three Magic Points in his pool who sacrifices a white bull 
worshipper and god, and must be regularly topped up. (worth seven Magic Points) would raise his pool to seven points, not 

While Magic Points remain in the pool, the theist can use them ten. In this way a deity cannot be appeased with a series of petty 
to request miracles, but once the pool is expended no more requests offerings which slowly accumulate excessive devotional strength. 
may be made. The source of these points need not necessarily be the 
theist himself (see Donating Magic Points below) but the maximum 

SaAcCrRoOSsaAnNCcTt LoOCcAaTtIioONnSs 
size of the pool is limited by the theist’s cult rank. 

The concept of only being allowed to recharge their devotional 

& Lay Member — None pool at specific holy places may initially seem rather restrictive, but 

& Inidate — ¥4 of the Theist's POW this need not be an overly prohibitive aspect of theism. A worship- 

« Acolyte — /2 of the Theist’s POW per can call upon his god or gods for miracles at any time; they only 

& Priest — % of the Theist’s POW need to return to a temple to reaffirm the bond with the deity. 

« High Priest — All of the Theist’s POW This fundamental element of theism should instead been seen 
as an opportunity by Games Masters to provide challenges and plot 

The size of the devotional pool has no bearing on the theist’s hooks with which to entwine his characters, granting them reasons 
normal POW capacity for storing personal Magic Points. Assuming to return to the source of their power, search out lost places of divine 
the theist is donating Magic Points from his own POW, after the significance or build new temples to spread the worship of their cult. 
transference is made he can regenerate or recoup Magic Points as Whilst this works well in settings where cults are localised, it can 
normal. pose a problem in campaigns where the characters are expected to 

The implication of this method of paying for their miracles is travel extensively. Assuming the cult or gods are not omnipresent 
that a worshipper, with enough preparation time, can fully load 
up both his devotional pool, and his own personal Magic Points in 
advance of performing some quest. On the downside, refilling his 
devotional pool requires him not only to return to a place of cult 
significance, but also personally to donate or transfer the points from 
his own resources. 

180



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

KAaRrAa'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Kara, now an acolyte of Myceras, is sent to one of the outlying watch 

lowers which guard the city-state’sfertile valley territory, garrisoned by a unit 
of heavy Meerish infantyy. Although she left the city well prepared, several 
attacks by a strange creature have required Kara to cast many miracles, drain- 
ing her devotional pool to a single Magic Point. 

Fortunately her visit coincides with a cult holy day sacred to Myceras and 
the watch tower incorporates a sanctified shrine to the god. As the attending 
representative of the cull, Kara leads the soldiers in_formal worstap of their 
patron deity. The Games Master declares that the ceremony will generate a 
number of Magic Points, which Kara may tap in order to restore part of her 
devotional pool. 

Stnce the squad numbers less than 100 worshappers, the amounotf Magic 
Points she may harvest from the ceremony s equal to one quarter of Kara’s 
POWor 4 MPs. These she transfers into her devotwonal pool, replenishing it 
to 4 MP Thus is only half of her potential maximum, but even if she held a 
second ceremony on the next holy day she cannot increase the current number 
of pool Magic Points beyondf our; limited as she us by the size of her congre- 
gation. Kara will need to return to the main temple to gather a greater number 
of Magic Points, or use an alternative source of power. 

Thirdly, on the last turn of the exhortation the theist must pass 
an Exhort skill check. This reveals whether or not the worshipper 
has performed the ritual request in the correct manner. Failure to 
perform this correctly can result in the god turning a deaf ear to the 
supplicant, or worse still, punishing them in some manner. 

CossTt oOFf REeQqUuEeSsTtIinNgG aA MIiRrAaCcLlEe 
The cost of requesting a miracle depends on both its cult level 

and the success level of the Exhort skill roll: 

across the game world, Games Masters can aid theists on long or 
& Critical Success: the miracle occurs yet there is no Magic 

far-reaching quests in various ways. Some suggestions are: 
Point cost. 

& The deity presenting the theist with a holy relic which acts as & Success: the caster’s devotional pool loses the full Magic Point 

a portable shrine or temple cost, and the miracle occurs successtully. 

& The ability to build temporary shrines which work a single & Failure: the miracle does not occur, but no Magic Point is 

time if sanctified with a suitable offering taken from the devotional pool. 

& Allowing theists to worship at foreign temples which enshrine & Fumble: the miracle does not occur, and 1 Magic Point is 

a similar divine being as their own deity taken from the devotional pool. 

& Making certain natural locations by default, sacrosanct 
to their deity (all caves, mephitic hot springs or the sea for 

Initiate level miracles cost one Magic Point, Acolyte level mira- 
instance) 

cles cost two, and Priest level miracles cost three. 

EXxHhOoRrTtAaTtIioOnN TIimMEe 
REeQqUuEeSsTtIinNgG aA MIiRrAaCcLlEe Requesting a miracle takes an increasing amount of time 

Calling for a miracle is simply a matter of performing the correct depending on the cult level the miracle becomes available at: 
exhortation to convince the god to channel its power through or on 
behalf of its worshipper. Such a request depends on a number of & Initiate level miracles take 1 Turn 

prerequisites. & Acolyte level miracles take 2 Turns 

First the theist must have mastered understanding of miracle & Priest level miracles take 3 Turns 

being requested, as described earlier under Learning Miracles. 
If the theist wishes to cast multiple instances of the same miracle 

Without knowing the correct prayer or exhortation, the worshipper 
with a single exhortation roll, then each additional instance adds an 

cannot convince his deity to perform the miracle. 
extra turn to the time, and adds its full Magic Point requirement to 

Secondly the theist must have the requisite number of Magic 
the final cost. 

Points remaining in the devotional pool he maintains with that deity. 
The Exhort skill check is made on the final turn of the exhorta- 

If too few remain, or the pool has run dry, the god will no longer 
tion; the result of the skill check occurring immediately. 

listen to any requests made to it. Thus a worshipper should, when 
possible, take care to perform regular donations to their god. 

181



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

MAaGgNnIiTtUuDdEe AanNDd InNtTEeNnSsIitTyY RAaNnKk 
The potency of miracles is based upon the strength of the rela- The minimum cult rank the spell is available to. This is a guide- 

tionship between a theist and his god. The more devoted the wor- line only. Cults of gods which specialise or control a particular sphere 

shipper, the more power the deity can funnel through them. This of power may offer certain miracles to lower ranking cult members. 

not only increases the effect of the miracle, but also makes it more 
difficult for others to dispel. ReessiistT ((EEvVaAdDeE//EEnNdDuURrAaNnCcEe/ WWIilLlLpPoOwWEeRr)) 

Miracles have a default Magnitude and Intensity equal to one Offensive miracles do not necessarily take effect automatically. 

tenth of the worshipper’s Devotion skill value. Resisting targets may make an Opposed Evade, Endurance or Will- 

A theist need not apply the entirety of a miracle’s Intensity if power test (as specified) in order to avoid the effect of the miracle 

they wish to limit the effect of the god’s magic. entirely. Note that Resist (livade) spells require the target to have a 
Combat Action available in order to throw themselves clear. 

DIiSsPpEeLlLliInNgG Aa MIiRrAaCcLlEe 
Miracles may be dismissed by spells or spirits capable of negat- Note that some of the following spells can be extremely potent. 

ing magic. Due to the inherent strength of theist miracles, it usually This is deliberate, and Games Masters who fear abuse should limit 

requires a counterspell of great potency to affect them. the availability of these miracles to antagonistic cults, for which they 
are primarily designed. No specific guidance is provided for whether 

LIimMIitTaAtTiIoOnNSs tToO MIiRrAaCcLlEeSs certain miracles are restricted to the exhorting theist or can be cast 
There are no overt limitations to the concurrent number or on others; nor whether the recipient must be a member of that cult. 

potency of miracles a theist can maintain, since in effect their god Such things must be decided when the cult is designed. 
is doing all of the work for them. The only restrictions occur in the 
need to return to a cult sanctuary to recharge their devotional pool ABbSsOoRrPpTtIioOnN 
of Magic Points. Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate 

Some miracles may possess an extended duration which can last This miracle absorbs incoming magic aimed at the recipient 

hours, days or even months. In these cases the size of the theist’s or his equipment, converting its energy into Magic Points which 

devotional pool should be temporarily reduced by the number of then replenish his personal Magic Points attribute, assuming there 

Magic Points for each miracle which is still active. is space for the additional points. Excess Magic Points garnered 
through Absorption simply vanish. Absorption does not affect spells 
already in existence, prior to the miracle’s manifestation. The effects 
of Absorption depend on the relative Magnitude of both itself and 

MIiRrAaCcLlEe DEeSsCcRrIiPpTtIioOnNSs the incoming spell. Any spell absorbed by this miracle is cancelled, 
Every divine miracle is defined by a series of traits explaining and has no effect. 

how it is used in the game, followed by a description of the spell’s 
precise effects. In most cases the physical and temporal parameters ABbSsOoRrPpTtIioOnN REessUuLlTtSs 

of miracles can be hand waved unless the Games Master wishes to Incoming Spell’s Magnitude is. . . Effect 

keep detailed track during tactical situations. Equal to or weaker than Absorption’s The incoming spell is absorbed, and 

Theists need not call forth miracles at their maximum effects if Magnitude Absorption remains. 

they wish to be more selective. 1 or more points stronger than Absorption eliminated, and incoming 

Absorption’s Magnitude spell takes effect. 
ARrEeAa (X)) 

The miracle affects all targets within a specified radius, described AEeGgIiSs 
as Metres, Tens of Metres or Kilometres. The defined units are mul- Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate 
tiplied by the Intensity of the miracle to determine the actual radius. Creates or augments a shield which glows with the cult symbols 
If the miracle lacks the Ranged trait, the effect is centred upon the of the deity. The magical shield takes the attributes of a Hoplite 
casting theist or whatever he touches. shield, although its parrying Size depends on the Intensity of the 

miracle. Intensity 1-2 is a Small shield, 3-4 Medium, 5-6 Large, 7-8 
DuurraaTtIioOnN (X) 

Huge, 9-10 Enormous and 11+ Colossal. 
The miracle’s effects stay in place for an amount of time defined 

The Aegis is immune to all damage. If cast upon an existent 
as either Instant, Minutes, Hours, Days or Months. The defined 

shield, it is protected until the miracle ends. 
period is multiplied by the Intensity of the miracle to calculate the 
actual duration, except of course if the miracle is instantaneous. At AWwAaKkEeNn 
the end of this period the miracle vanishes. Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Priest 

Awaken brings part of the god’s awareness into its consecrated 
RAaNnGgEeDd (XX ) 

shrine or temple, enabling the deity to animate its sanctified idol or 
Ranged miracles may be cast upon targets within a range defined 

take control of its sacred animal(s), depending on the nature of the 
as either Metres or Tens of Metres. The defined units are multiplied 

cult. It is normally reserved for cult holy days, except in times of 
by the Intensity of the miracle to determine the actual distance. Mir- 

emergency. The embodied god cannot leave the consecrated area, 
acles which lack the Ranged trait may only be cast on others if they 

but during that time it can awe its worshippers, express its displea- 
can be touched for the entirety of the exhortation. 

sure or defend its own shrine. 

182



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

The limits of the miracle depend on what is used for the embod- in which case the medium through which the information is trans- 
iment. An awakened statue or cult idol can have a combined STR +- mitted is different. 
SIZ of up to ten times the Intensity. This value is used to calculate If the target is either magically protected against scrying by a 
both the idol’s Damage Modifier and its Hit Points per location. spell of greater Magnitude, held (or hiding) within the consecrated 
Its Armour Points depend upon the material it is constructed from, ground of a different cult, or dead, then the miracle fails. The target 
usually 6 for wooden idols, 8 for hollow metal and 10 for stone. The of Behold may attempt to resist the miracle if desired. 
idol performs all actions at the same value as the caster’s Devotion 
skill, has a Initiative Bonus equal to the Intensity, and one Action BEeRrSseErRkK 
Point per four levels of Intensity (or fraction thereof). Other physical Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate, Resist (Waillpower) 

attributes should be created based upon the shape and size of the The recipient of Berserk is overcome with bloodlust, causing him 

idol (see Default Natural Weapons for Unusually Sized Creatures to disregard his own safety in exchange for being imbued with tre- 

page 222). mendous stamina and toughness. For the duration of the miracle the 

Awakened creatures are handled slightly differently. Like idols Damage Modifier of the recipient is increased by two steps, the Size 

the deity may awaken a creature of up to a maximum STR+SIZ of his weapon counts as one step larger for the purpose of penetrat- 

of ten times the Intensity of the miracle. However, if the shrine or ing parries, and he is immune to all the detrimental effects of Seri- 

temple lacks a giant example of the sacred animal, the deity can ous Wounds and Fatigue. A Major wound will still incapacitate him. 

instead awaken multiple beasts provided their combined total does In return the subject may not Parry, Evade or cast any magic 

not exceed the limit set by the Intensity. Other than that the creature while under the influence of Berserk. However the berserker auto- 

or creatures possess their normal Action Points, Damage Modifier, matically succeeds in resisting any Special Effect used against him. 

Hit Points, Initiative Bonus and Armour Points. They perform skills Unwilling recipients receive a chance to resist. Normally, the 

at either their base (or trained) value or at the value of the caster’s recipient remains in the Berserk state for the entire duration of the 

Devotion skill, whichever is higher. spell, but Games Masters may allow a Berserk character to shake 
off the effects with an unopposed Willpower test. At the end of the 

BAaCcKkLlAaSshH spell, the recipient immediately suffers twice the deferred Fatigue 
Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Metres), Rank Initiate levels they would have lost during the entire combat. 
Backlash makes physical assault upon the recipient extremely 

dangerous, redirecting an inflicted injury back upon the attacker. BIinNdD GHhOoSsTt 
The magic only affects wounds that inflict equal or less Hit Points Duration (Days), Rank Acolyte, Resust (Willpower) 

than the Intensity of the miracle — translocating the damage so that Bind Ghost takes the soul of a creature or person just slain, and 

it affects the attacker in precisely the same location they struck, temporarily turns it into a Haunt (see page 150) bound to the place 

ignoring any armour. of its death. The miracle is usually performed on animal sacrifices or 

This miracle affects both hand to hand and ranged attacks, pro- willing volunteers, but in cases where the victim does not wish to be 

viding the assailant is within range. Even though the recipient may so bound they are permitted the opportunity to resist. 

be near immune to injury, it does not provide immunity to any Spe- Tor the duration of the miracle the ghost must obey commands 

cial Effect they may have suffered as part of the attack. given to it by the theist. However, the way it performs its duties is 
guided by the nature or personality of the victim. Once the miracle 

BEeAaSsTt FoOrRmM ends, the soul is freed from all obligations, and permitted to depart 
Duration (Hours), Ranged (Metres), Rank Acolyte, Resist (Endurance) to its intended afterlife. The theist is limited to binding souls whose 
This miracle transforms the target and all his personal belong- POW is no more than twice the Intensity of the miracle. 

ings into an animal that is sacred to the cult. The target retains his 
INT, CHA and POW scores, but exchanges his STR, DEX, CON BLless CrrooOPps 
and SIZ scores for average values for that of the animal type, and Area (Tens of Metres), Duration (Months), Rank Acolyte 

gains a bonus to each physical Characteristic of +1 per point of When cast on cultivated farmland this miracle protects the crops 

Intensity. He also gains the natural abilities of the creature. The within its area against naturally occurring bad weather, blight, and 

animal cannot be mystical or magical in any way, and the Games insect infestation, guaranteeing a nominal harvest if the magic is 

Master should have final say as to what manner of creature would maintained from sowing to harvest. Bless Crops can also provide 

fit a specific cult if it is not obvious. protection against magical disasters, provided the Magnitude of the 
adverse magic does not exceed that of the blessing. 

BehHoLldD 
Area (Metres), Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate, Resust (Willpower) BRrEeAatThHEe WAaTtEeRr 
Behold summons a vision of what a fellow cult member of lesser Duration (Hours), Rank Initiate 

rank is currently experiencing. The image requires some sort of cult Breath Water permits the recipient to breathe water (the subject 

related paraphernalia in which to manifest, such as a sacred mirror, will still be able to breathe air as well) for the duration of the miracle. 

pool of pure water or even narcotic smoke rising from a brazier. It also protects against pressure if diving deep below the surface of a 

The view provided is limited to the defined area, centred upon lake or the sea. Under the influence of this miracle the recipient can 

the target of the miracle, which may permit identification of their speak and cast magic as normal. 

location if enough clues are visible. Behold conveys only a single 
primary sense, which for most cults is a visual image. Some however, 
depending on the deity in question, use sound or even scent instead; 

183



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

CAaLlLl WIiNnDdss The minimum labour required to create a temporary sanctuary 

Area (Kilometres), Duration (Hours), Rank Acolyte depends on the setting, but it should be significant enough to be 

This miracle permits the theist to bend the winds to his will. The considered a major effort; for example an entire day of collecting 

maximum strength of winds they can unleash depends on their cult stones and rocks to form a crude altar. In exceptional circumstances 

rank. Acolytes can control or summon up to Strong Breezes, Priests it can be cast on cult artefacts. 

up to Moderate Gales, and High Priests up to Storms (see Weather The effects of the miracle are many fold. Not only does the con- 

page 84). If the caster can control the wind he may reduce it to a secrated area permit cult worshippers to recharge their Devotional 

complete Calm or change its direction if desired. If two or more Pool (see page 180), but it also allows for a number of additional 

weather magics are in contest over control of the winds, the spell or cult miracles (up to the consecration’s Intensity) to be embedded or 

miracle with the greatest Magnitude takes precedence. bound to the area, extending their duration (or held readiness) to 
that of the Consecrate. 

CHhAaMmEeLlEeoONn These extra miracles need not come from whoever performs the 

Duration (Minutes), Rank Acolyte consecration, but the cult rank of the magic cannot exceed that of 

This miracle permits the recipient to fade into the background, the consecrating acolyte or priest. Furthermore, each embedded 

becoming near invisible to normal observation. However Chame- miracle counts against the devotional pool of whichever theist cast 

leon is only effective when present in an environment specific to it, until the Consecrate itself expires or, if of Instant duration, the 

the nature of the cult. The Chameleon miracle provided by a syl- miracle is triggered. 

van cult, for example, would only be effective in woods and forests; Such is the strength of the divine presence within the sanctified 
whereas a thief cult might instead provide Chameleon which works area, that requesting miracles from unaligned gods whilst inside the 
in darkness and shadow. perimeter of the consecration becomes more difficult. Exhorting the 

Whilst the recipient remains motionless, crouched or flattened deities of neutral cults suffer one grade of difficulty, whereas those 
against the terrain, they cannot be spotted by normal Perception of hostile cults are two grades harder. 
rolls relying on vision. If they move however, the constantly shifting 
patterns across their body will reveal them to sharp sighted individu- 
als. In these circumstances any attempt to interact with the recipient 

KAaRrAa'’Ss SaAgGaA 
—whether observing where they go, attacking, parrying, and so on — Afier years off aithful service Kara is promoted to the rank of priest, and 
inflicts a penalty against the observer of one difficulty grade per four granted the opportunity to found a new shrine to Myceras in the newly annexed 
points of Intensity. Creatures with other primary senses or observers city of Kopash, a known den of thieves and iniquity. Kara finds a suitable 
with magical perceptions are immune to this miracle. plot of ground in the Mercenaries® Quarter, and has constructed a modest 

roofed portico, within the walls of which is the cult sanctuary where Myceras’s 
CLlEeaArR SKkIiEeSs 

bejewelled golden statue stands, beneath the open sky. 
Area (Kilometres), Duration (Hours), Rank Acolyte 

When it is_finished Kara holds a dedication ceremony, wnviting the wor- 
This miracle grants a reprieve from cloudy or overcast weather. 

shuppers of Myceras to attend. During these rituals she casts Consecrate to 
Rain dwindles, sweltering humidity is reduced, and dark clouds sep- 

sanclify the area. At the same time she decides to bind several other maracles 
arate to reveal the sky. The scale of the effect depends on the cult 

inlo the consecration in order to protect the shrine. She has the choice of only 
rank of the theist. Acolytes can disperse up to Heavy Cloud cover 

two spells suitablefor the task, Beast Form or Sunspear. 
and Moderate rains, Priests up to Moderately Overcast cloud cover 

Not wishing to bind up too much of her devotional pool in maintaining 
and Very Heavy rains, and High Priests up to Storm Clouds and 

the shrine defences, she settles on placing a primed Beast Form (Bull) on 
Deluges (see Weather page 84). Clear Skies cannot alter magical- 

the statue, and a Sunspear on the altar; requesting that Myceras cast these 
ly-created weather effects of a greater Magnitude. 

maracles if anyone atlempts to desecrate the cult objects. This reduces the size 

Crloudp CaLlLl of her pool by four points, but Kara predicts the investment will be necessary. 
Sure enough, the following morning Kara discovers a rather distressed thief 

Area (Kilometres), Duration (Hours), Rank Acolyte 
transformed into a bull and caught within the shrine precinct; sacrificing this 

This miracle gathers together shreds and wisps of cloud, weaving 
bull to the god sends word that this particular shrine @s off hmats... 

them together to bring rain, block out the sun or even form con- 
cealing fogs. Like Clear Skies the extent of the effect depends on 
cult rank. Acolytes can create Heavy Cloud cover, Moderate rains 
or mist, Priests can gather up to Moderately Overcast cloud cover, 

COoRrRrUuPpTtIioOnN 
Very Heavy rains or thick fog, and High Priests up to Storm Clouds, 

Duration (Hours), Ranged, Rank Acolyte, Resist (Endurance) 
Deluges and Pea-soup fogs (see Weather page 84). Cloud Call can- 

This dire miracle is used as a curse against enemies or those that 
not alter magically-created weather effects of a greater Magnitude. 

transgress cult tenets. If the target of the spell fails to resist, they 

COoNnSsEeCcRrAaTtEe begin to deteriorate physically in a manner suitable to the god. This 
could be anything from pestilent boils, vegetative outgrowths or even 

Area (‘Iens of Metres), Duration (Months), Rank Acolyte 
a slow transformation of flesh to sand. 

Consecrate is vital to the creation of sanctified ground, upon 
which theists may communicate with their gods. It is usually as fun- 
damental a part of a shrine or temple foundation as its cornerstone, 
but may actually be cast almost anywhere providing some form of 
temporary altar or image of the deity is erected prior to the casting. 

184



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

At the end of each hour, the victim must make an unopposed EaArRtThHqQUuAaKkEe 
Endurance roll and depending on the success level, suffer the Area (Tens of Metres), Duration (Instant), Rank Priest, Resist (Evade) 
following: Earthquake causes a ground tremor capable of knocking people 

from their feet and collapsing rigid buildings. At the very minimum, 
& 1If the roll is a critical success, the victim takes no damage 

failing to resist the miracle causes the victim to fall prone. If located 
& 1If the roll is successful, the victim sustains 1d3 points of dam- 

within a building, built up area or some vulnerable location (such 
age to every location 

as a forest or beneath a cliff), failing to evade also indicates that the 
& 1If the roll fails, the victim sustains 1d6 points of damage to 

person is struck, and trapped by falling debris. For secondary effects, 
every location 

consult the following table. Use the size of the damage dice in a 
& If the roll is fumbled, the victim dies in a horrific transforma- 

Contest of Strength (see Brawn) to determine the difficulty of being 
tion of their body 

extracted from the wreckage. 
Those who realise what they have contracted either seek out 

EaArRtThHqQUuAaKkEe TAaBbLlEe 
someone capable of dispelling the curse, or return to the cult temple, 
begging for forgiveness and premature cessation of the punishment. Intensity Secondary Effects Potential 

Damage 

CUurrREe MAaLlAaDdYy 1 Suspended objects swing. None 

Duration (Instant), Rank Initiate 2 Delicately balanced objects topple. None 

This miracle cures the effects of any mundane disease or poison 3 Walls and buildings creak. None 

afflicting the target; or magical ones whose potency is less than the Plaster and glass windows crack, trees and other 
4 . . . None 

value of the Devotion skill of the caster. If the recipient is suffering tall objects quiver dramatically. 

from the possession of a Disease Spirit, the spell exorcises the hostile Heavy furniture moved, wall mounted objects 
None 

spirit provided its Intensity does not exceed half the Intensity of the fall, cracks open in walls. 

miracle (rounded up). For example, an Intensity 5 Cure Malady can Modest buildings of earth, wattle and daub or 

exorcise any Disease Spirit of Intensity 3 or less. . ; . 1d2 damage to a 
6 mud brick partially collapse. Minor branches 

single location 
fall. 

CUuRrEe SEenNSsEe 
Heavy furniture overturned. Buildings of 

Duration (Instant), Rank Acolyte 
carth, wattle and daub or mud brick destroyed. 

Clure Sense enables the theist to cure a specific type of sensory o Lo i 1d4 damage to a 
7 Buildings of solid timber or masonry partially . . 

injury such as deafness, blindness, and so on. The effects of the mir- single location 
collapse. Fall of columns, statuary and 

acle are permanent. boundary walls. Major tree limbs fall. 

Modest buildings collapse. Ground cracks 
Diismiisss ELleEmMEeNnTtAaLl 

conspicuously, rockfalls from steep slopes. 1d6 damage to a 
Duration (Instant), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Initiate, Resist 8 

Underground pipes and sewers broken. single location 
(Wallpower) 

Wooden bridges collapse. Small trees topple. 
Dismiss Elemental may be cast against Gnomes, Salamanders, 

Well constructed buildings collapse. Large 
Shades, Sylphs or Undines. The spell affects an elemental of up to 

9 scale fortifications, city walls and stone bridges 1d8 damage to 
1 cubic metre in size per point of Intensity. Failure to resist the spell 

damaged. Ground badly cracked. Landslides two locations 
causes the elemental to be dismissed, leaving the material substance 

and avalanches considerable. Big trees topple. 
of its body in place. 

Few, if any, structures remain standing. Tunnels 
] 1d10 damage to 

Diismiisss MAacgiic 10 and caves collapse. Broad fissures in ground. . 
three locations 

Huge trees topple. 
Duration (Instant), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Initiate 

Total destruction, even colossal stone 
Dismiss Magic may be cast against either a general target, or a . i 1d12 damage to 

11+ monuments suffer partial collapse. Cliffs and 
specific miracle or spell. Dismiss Magic will eliminate a combined ; four locations 

mountain flanks shatter. 
Magnitude of spells equal to its own Magnitude. A spell cannot be 
partially eliminated. When used against a spell of equal or lower 
Magnitude which normally counters magic (such as Absorption, 

ELleEmMEeNnTtAaLl SuUmMMmOoNnIiNnGg 
Spell Resistance or Reflection) then Dismiss Magic takes precedence. 

Duration (Hours), Ranged (Metres), Rank Initiate 
If not aimed at a specific spell, Dismiss Magic starts with the 

This miracle calls up an elemental associated with the cult to 
most powerful magic affecting the target. If it fails to eliminate any 

assist as a personal guard or servant. For example cults associated 
spell (because the spell’s Magnitude is too high), then the miracle 

with the God of Storms would summon sylphs. The miracle sum- 
ends, and no more spells will be eliminated. 

mons an elemental of one cubic metre per point of Intensity in 1d3 
Dismiss Magic may be fired defensively to neutralise incoming 

offensive spells, by using the Counter Spell reactive action. Combat Rounds, which remains under the command of the theist 
for the entire duration but cannot stray further than the range. For 
obvious reasons, the caster must have access to the same volume of 
the elemental’s material to cast this spell successtully. If less mate- 
rial is available, then the caster can summon a smaller elemental if 
desired. 

185

(] 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

ENnTtaANnGgLlEe FeEcCuUNnDdIiTtYy 
Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Acolyte, Resust (Evade) Duration (Months), Rank Acolyte 
Entangle animates natural vegetation so that it lashes about, When cast on a person or creature, Fecundity will — depending 

snagging and gripping the target. The victim must resist the miracle on its sex - ensure it will bear or sire offspring the next time it per- 
or be held immobile for its entire duration. forms a reproductive act. Provided the miracle is maintained for the 

full term of gestation or pregnancy, the progeny will be born healthy. 
ENnTtHhRrAaLlLl Tecundity also provides the antenatal young protection against mag- 

Duration (Hours), Rank Initiate ical curses, provided the Magnitude of the adverse magic does not 
Enthrall increases the recipient’s sexual attraction, making exceed that of the miracle. 

all those naturally interested in the recipient friendlier and more 
focussed upon them — which could be a very good or very bad thing FoORrTtIiFfyY 
depending on the circumstances. Members of the opposite sex (or Area (Tens of Metres), Duration (Instant), Rank Initiate, Resist (Evade) 
those of the same sex that would find the target sexually attractive) Tortify strengthens large scale constructions, making them more 
who attempt to resist any Influence or Streetwise rolls from the resilient to damage from natural disasters, siege weapons, and mag- 
recipient suffer one grade of difficulty. Resisting Seduction attempts ical attack. The miracle adds its Intensity to the natural Armour 
are treated as two grades harder. Points of all buildings and walls within its area of effect. Offensive 

magic which seeks to damage or modify a construction under the 
ExXcCoOMmMmUuNnICicAaTtEe protection of Fortify has its Intensity reduced by that of the Fortify 

Duration (Instant), Ranged (Metres), Rank Priest, Resist (Wallpower) miracle. 
Excommunicate can only be called down upon a worshipper of 

the caster’s cult. It severs the mystical link the worshipper shares GRrOoWwTtHh 
with his god, causing the target’s devotional pool to be drained of Area (Tens of Metres), Duration (Hours), Rank Preest 
all Magic Points, and permanently removing access to miracles from Growth accelerates the growing speed of vegetation, ageing it 
that cult. Unless the target can make amends for whatever transgres- by one year for each hour until the miracle concludes. Under its 
sion caused the excommunication to be cast in the first place, their effects, trees and bushes can increase in size and verdure dramati- 
cult specific skills of Devotion and Exhort become mere academic cally, although at the cost of wildly sprawling, tangled proliferation 
knowledge with no power. of every plant within the area of effect. Repeated use of this miracle 

can potentially grow a thick forest over what had been open fields a 
ExOoRrccCiIssmM few days previously. 

Duration (Instant), Rank Acolyte, Resist (Waillpower) 
By means of this miracle, the theist calls upon their god to drive HAaRrMmOoNnISisEe 

out a spirit currently possessing a corporeal being. Whether the pos- Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Initiate, Resist 
session is dominant or covert is immaterial. The magic exorcises (Wallpower) 
spirits with an Intensity of up to half the Intensity of the miracle. Harmonise causes the target to do exactly what the theist does. 
What occurs next depends on the attitude and type of spirit, but If not resisted the victim must mimic every physical move, albeit 
belligerent ones with the power to discorporate may be tempted to in a jerky, almost puppet-like manner. It only works on beings with 
engage other nearby targets in Spirit Combat. Thus this spell can be roughly the same physiology as the caster; with limbs or locations 
potentially dangerous for the caster or his fellows. not shared by both participants remaining unaffected by the magic. 

The miracle only controls gross motor skills, and does not permit 
EXxTtEenNSsIioOnN control of the victim’s speech. Use of this magic can humiliate 

Duration (Special), Rank Priest someone from afar, or perhaps even force them into performing a 
Extension lengthens the duration of any miracle with a non-in- murderous or suicidal act. 

stantaneous duration, for as long as the caster wishes to maintain If Harmonise is used to force the subject to attack or defend, the 
it. Extension can be cast any time, provided the miracle being combat style rolls are automatically one grade harder to accomplish 
extended is still functioning. Other than reducing the theist’s devo- owing to the jerky movement of the victim. 
tional pool by several Magic Points (three for Extension, and one 
or more for the extended miracle) the miracle has no other mainte- HEeaALl Bopdy 
nance requirements; unless the Games Master wishes to add any to Duration (Instant), Rank Acolyte 
match his setting. This powerful miracle instantly heals all Minor and Serious 

Wounds suffered by the target. Like Heal Wound, this miracle has 
FeEaArR no effect on Major Wounds save to stabilise the injury, preventing 

Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Metres), Rank Initiate, Resist (Wallpower) death. To repair maimed or dismembered body locations requires 
This miracle causes the target to be gripped with overwhelming the Rejuvenate miracle. 

fear. Targets which fail to resist will flee in terror away from the 
theist, and avoid engaging in combat unless brought to bay. It has no HEeaALl MIiNnDd 
effect on unconscious targets, targets without an IN'T or INS Char- Duration (Instant), Rank Acolyte 
acteristic, or targets that are currently under the effect of another This miracle removes all madness and mental derangements 
emotion-controlling spell of higher Intensity. from a single target. In the case of magically-induced madness, the 

186



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

spell works if its Magnitude is equal to or greater than that of the LiIgGhHtTnNIinNgG 
magical disorder. Duration (Instant), Ranged (Tens of Melres), Rank Initiate, Resist (Evade) 

This miracle causes a sizzling bolt of lightning to either streak 
HeeAaLl WoouunDd 

down from the sky, or be projected from the hand or weapon of the 
Duration (Instant), Rank Initiate 

theist, towards the target. If the bolt is not evaded, it will inflict 1d6 
Heals a single body location back to its full Hit Points, provided 

damage per two points of Intensity to a random hit location. Nat- 
the injury is no more severe than a Serious Wound. It has no effect 

ural and worn armour offers no protection against this damage, but 
on Major Wounds save for stabilising the injury, preventing death. 

magical protection does. 

HEeAaRrTt SEeIizZuUrREe 
Duration (Instant), Ranged (Metres), Rank Priest, Resist (Endurance) 
Another dreadful miracle known to the darkest gods, whoever 

suffers this dire magic feels the veritable hand of the deity reach 
within his chest, squeezing his heart or perhaps tearing it out com- 
pletely. Those that fail to resist the miracle suffer a fatal heart attack 
and die instantly. If the resistance roll succeeds, the target still suf- 
fers a number of Hit Points damage equal to Intensity of the spell, 
directly to the location where their heart is contained, normally the 
chest for humanoids. Creatures without hearts are immune to this 
miracle. 

Different forms of this miracle exist, affecting different organs 
according to the nature of the deity offering it (Brain Seizure, for 
example). 

IlLlLuUsSiIoOnN 
Area (Metres), Duration (Hours), Rank Imitiate, Resist (Special) 
Tllusion is used to change the sensory projections of an area or 

single target, making it seem to be something completely different. 
Tor example a tiger can be made to look like a harmless cat, sound 
like it meows when it roars, and feel silky soft instead of coarse wiry 
fur. The theist can adjust one sensory projection per two points of 
Intensity. Once set, the illusion can no longer be modified. 

The largest target which can be affected must be able to fit within 
the perimeter of the miracle. Unwilling living targets may resist with 
Endurance. Observers who interact with the illusion are permitted 
an opposed Willpower roll against the miracle, in order to resist 
any debilitating psychosomatic effects it creates, e.g. deafness, pain, 
nausea. Whilst the illusion itself is incapable of causing harm, the 
underlying target or area remains as dangerous as it was before the 
miracle. 

LAaYy TtoO REeSsTt 
Duration (Instant), Rank Initiate 

MAaDdNnEeSsSs 
This miracle is used to ensure that the soul of a recently killed 

Duration (Days), Ranged (Metres), Rank Imitiate, Resist (Waillpower) 
person or creature reaches a deserving afterlife. Its primary purpose 

This miracle infuses the target with gibbering madness. Targets 
is to prevent angry, possibly coerced victims returning from death 

which fail to resist will rant and rave uncontrollably, performing acts 
as vengeful spirits or reinhabiting their bodies as corporal undead. 

of utter insanity in a manner fitting to their personality, plot line 

LeEeEcChHIinNgG and dramatic circumstances. In general, mad characters should be 

Area (Iens of Metres), Duration (Minutes), Rank Acolyte more harmless distractions than ticking time bombs. In the case of 

Using the blood of sacrifices scattered over an area, this mir- player characters, until the Madness subsides or is somehow cured, 

acle disrupts the flow of magic which enters the zone, dissipating the insane victim should be placed under control of the Games Mas- 

its power. Within the area all magic, even that of the caster, is sup- ter unless he deems the player is capable of acting out the insanity. 

pressed by the Magnitude of the miracle. Any encroaching spell 
whose Magnitude is reduced to zero is rendered inactive until the 
target of its effect leaves the area. Spells cast within the region with 
equal or less Magnitude automatically fail. 

187



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

MIiNnDdBbLlAaSsTt PAaccIiFfyY 
Duration (Days), Ranged (Metres), Rank Initiate, Resist (Willpower) Area (Tens of Melers), Duration (Minutes), Rank Acolyte, Resist 

This spell blasts the intellect of the victim, obliterating their sapi- (Wallpower) 
ence. If not resisted, the victim’s IN'T is temporarily converted to Pacify suppresses aggressive and violent behaviour within its 
animalistic INS, removing from them the power of speech, writing area of effect. Those that fail to resist the miracle are unable to 
or any other form of communication. It also prevents them from cause harm to another, although they may defend themselves using 
utilising equipment and devices. If forced to fight in this condition, non-harmful techniques. If unthreatened, those subject to the magic 
the victim will by default use their Unarmed skill. Although pre- will sheathe or drop weapons, stop belligerent demonstration and 
vented from utilising complex thought, it does not limit instinct and cease all arguments. The miracle does not change personal opinion, 
base cunning. merely makes it difficult to act in a hostile manner. 

MIiNnDdLlIinNkK PEeRrSseEvVeErRaAnNCcEe 
Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Initiate Duration (Hours), Rank Initiate 
This miracle allows mind-to-mind communication, theistic Through this miracle the recipient can channel the strength 

knowledge and devotional pool Magic Points to be shared between of his god, becoming inured to the effects of hard labour. Whilst 
participants. Its use is normally restricted to those of the same or the miracle remains active, the target of this spell will not receive 
closely allied cults, since once the magical link is established; there another level of Fatigue, no matter the hardship faced. Perseverance 
are no safeguards as to what can be tapped from the participants — does not grant any additional capability to lift, march or work; it just 
all of whom must join the Mindlink willingly. ensures the recipient will keep on going. This miracle has no effect 

Mindlink has two main purposes. Either it allows an entire cult upon Fatigue lost from asphyxiation or blood loss. 
hierarchy to support a handful of its priests so that they may cast 
many miracles, powered by the devotional pools of associates and PRrOoPpIiTtIiaATtEe 
underlings; or it grants lesser ranked cult members the ability (albeit Area (Kilometres), Duration (Weeks), Rank Acolyte 

temporarily) to call forth miracles normally beyond their capability. Used by cults who try to appease darker, more hostile deities, 

Each instance of Mindlink connects a pair of individuals in a two Propitiate exchanges regular worship for the agreement to leave a 

way link. Several castings using the same individual but with differ- region alone. The precise effect depends on the god being propiti- 

ent partners will make them the hub of a Mindlink network, able to ated, but the area affected is centred upon the shrine or temple of 

draw on the resources of each of the partners. that cult. Propitiating a lightning deity for example would not nec- 

If a mental or emotion-affecting spell is cast at someone partici- essarily prevent storms happening within the radius of the miracle, 

pating in a Mindlink, then everyone else directly linked to them must but no serious fires or injuries would occur from lightning strikes. 

also resist the spell or suffer its consequences. Although participants Similarly the tremors of an earthquake god would still be felt in a 

in a Mindlink share deliberately transmitted thoughts, they remain city, but no buildings would collapse — assuming the propitiations 

their own entity, and may sever their connection to the Mindlink by were maintained of course. 

willing it so on their turn, or by leaving the spell’s range. 
RAaIinN oOFf (SSuUBbSstTaANnCcEe)) 

MIiRrAaGgEe Area (Rilometres), Duration (Minutes), Rank Priest 

Area (Metres), Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate This miracle summons dark brooding clouds which then begin 

Mirage obscures a region, covering it with strange optical illu- to rain a particular, and most likely horrible substance with specific 

sions, usually via the cult associations of the deity. An earth god relevance to the cult deity, anything from blood to frogs. The miracle 

might cause clouds of swirling sand which form unsettling faces; is intended to inspire awe or terror rather than inflict direct harm, so 

whereas a sun deity might infuse the area with blinding, shimmer- the actual things raining down are relatively harmless. A rain of spi- 

ing curtain of light. The effect of this disconcerting obscurement is ders for instance would only produce non-venomous types; a rain of 

to conceal precisely what stands within the area, and make ranged fire would look scary, but as each glowing ember reached the ground 

attacks extremely difficult. Firing at anyone within the Mirage suf- it would extinguish. During the event, members of the cult should 

fers one difficulty grade per four points of Intensity. be treated as having the Intimidate ability (see page 216). 

OBbLlIiTtEerRAaTtEe RAaIiSsEe UNnDdEeAaDd 
Area (Kilometres), Duration (Instant), Rank Priest, Resist (Willpower) Duration (Hours), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Acolyte 

A dire spell to those who seck fame or remembrance after death, Raise Undead uses the physical remains of a corpse to create 

Obliterate removes every record of their existence — scouring it from either a skeleton or zombie. The miracle infuses the corpse with part 

scrolls, clay tablets, carved hieroglyphs, and every other method of of the deity’s own consciousness, so that it can obey commands, and 

inscribing knowledge. In addition the name of that person is wiped act with a degree of independent intelligence. However, the skill 

from the mind of everyone within range, save for the casting priest, capabilities of the undead automaton are limited to those of the 

unless they resist the miracle. Although this miracle is normally used theist who creates them. 

to expunge the glory of those whose crimes are so unforgivable that The number of corpses which can be raised is equal to the Inten- 

they must be forgotten for all time, some darker gods offer this as a sity of the miracle. Each skeleton or zombie also gains a bonus to its 

means for their worshippers to maintain secretive anonymity. STR and CON characteristics, again equal to the Intensity. Thus a 
theist who exhorted his god to grant him an Intensity 9 Raise Dead, 

188



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

could animate 9 skeletons each with +9 to STR and CON. Only RIipPeEnN 
creatures of a SIZ equal or less than the caster’s POW can be raised. Area (Metres), Duration (Instant), Rank Initiate 

For further details on skeletons and zombies, refer to the Crea- Ripen brings forth a single crop of fruits, tubers, roots, nuts, or 
ture Chapter. seeds from the vegetation within the area of effect. The miracle does 

not guarantee they are edible since that depends on the plants, but 
REeFfLlEecCTtIioOnN 

does ensure the crop is at the peak of its ripeness, no matter when 
Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate 

during the year the miracle is cast. Ripen cannot cause a plant or tree 
This miracle reflects incoming magic aimed at the target or his 

to give forth more than a single crop annually, so if it is used early 
equipment, redirecting it back at the original caster, depending on 

during the growing season, the vegetation will spend the remainder 
their relative Magnitudes. It does not have any effect on spells that 

of the year recovering. 
are already affecting the target, or spells the theist casts upon himself. 

SaAcCrReEdD BAanNDd 
 REeFfLleEcCTtiIoOnN REeSsUuLlTtSs 

Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Initiate 
Incoming Spell’s Magnitude is. . . Effect When cast upon a group of worshippers the miracle binds the 
Equal to or weaker than Reflection’s Incoming spell reflected, and Reflection recipients together as a sacred brotherhood, sharing their life force 
Magnitude. remains. between them. This has little effect until one of their number is 
1 or more points stronger than Reflection eliminated, and incoming spell wounded, whereupon the surviving brothers spread the effects of 
Reflection’s Magnitude. takes effect. the injury between them. 

Damage is divided evenly amongst remaining recipients, applied 
to the same location which was injured. Any Special Effects which 

REeJjuUVvEenNAaTtEe occur remain only with the originally wounded band member. Thus 
Duration (Special), Rank Priest 

in a band of six temple guardians linked by this miracle, if one is 
This miracle heals a single body location suffering from a Major 

wounded in the arm for 8 points of damage — normally a Serious 
Wound, no matter whether it has been crushed, mutilated or dis- 

Wound — the damage is instead split so that the original target and 
membered. The freshness of the injury affects the time taken for the 

one other suffers 2 points in that arm, whilst everyone else in the 
miracle to complete. Provided the recipient is still alive, and the loca- 

band suffers 1 point. 
tion was wounded within a number of hours equal to the Intensity 

The maximum number of brothers who can be bound together 
of the miracle, then Rejuvenate will heal all the damage instantly. 

in the band cannot exceed the Intensity of the miracle. They must 
Beyond this threshold the body part must undergo a more trau- 

also share the same basic physiology, or the miracle will fail. 
matic repair, which takes a number of days equal to the Hit Points 

The obvious application of the miracle is to augment the physi- 
lost on the location. If the miracle is allowed to lapse before the 

cal resilience of a unit of cult warriors in battle. However, it can also 
regrowth has completed, the location remains maimed and unus- be used to strengthen a cult champion whilst the remainder of the 
able, potentially left at a negative Hit Point level which cannot be pious participants remain safely hidden or out of reach of combat. 
cured. 

SeEvVEerR SPpIirRIitT 
REeSsuURrRrEeCcTt 

Duration (Instant), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Preest, Resust 
Duration (Instant), Rank Priest, Resust (Special) 

(Endurance) 
This miracle can bring the dead back to life by summoning the 

This miracle severs the bond between body and soul, with dire 
spirit of the deceased and persuading it to re-enter its body. For obvi- effect. If not resisted, the victim is slain instantly. If however, the vic- 
ous reasons the theist must cast Resurrect upon the corpse, which tim does throw off the miracle, they still receive 1 point of damage 
must possess at a minimum, those body locations vital for life. If the 

for every 2 levels of Intensity to each Hit Location simultaneously — 
target died due to some lingering disease, poison or magical curse, which may, in some cases, still seriously injure or even kill the victim. 
the ailment must be eliminated first or the miracle will fail. 

Resurrection is not guaranteed. The deceased spirit will often SHhIieElLdD 
have desires which preclude their return to life. The spirit may fear Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate 
the hardship of their life, the lingering pain of wounds, persistent This miracle protects the caster from physical attacks. Each 
illnesses, the feebleness of old age or may even piously wish to reach point of Intensity grants the recipient one Armour Point on all hit 
their loved ones in the afterlife. On the other hand a spirit might locations. This protection does not stack on top of worn armour, 
wish to return from the dead to protect their family, seek vengeance rather it supplants it in those areas less protected than what the mir- 
against their killer or complete a holy quest. acle itself provides. In some circumstances, even if the protective 

To judge the primary motivation of the spirit, work out which value of the Shield is less than the worn armour, it may still ward 
of their passions or devotion skills has the highest value. If this indi- against certain types of magical damage. 
cates that the spirit will be unwilling to return to life, it may attempt 
to resist the miracle using that particular passion or Devotion skill. 

Resurrect must be cast within a number of days equal to the 
Magnitude of the spell after death, otherwise the miracle automati- 
cally fails. A resurrected character returns to life with 1 Hit Point on 
all extant locations. 

189



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

iIRACLES BY lT ANK SouLl SiIgGhHTt 
Miracles by Cult Rank Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate 

This miracle enables the recipient to see the magical aura of 
Initiate Spells Summanry anyone he looks at, enabling him to discern that creature or spirit’s 

Absorption Lay to Rest current Magic Points, as well as the nature of any active spells, the 

Aegis Lightning source of their magic, and any enchanted items the creature is car- 
rying. It also permits the recipient to see into the spirit world, and 

Backlash Madness 
see beyond any visual illusions which may be concealing a creature’s 

Behold Mindblast 
true form — although this may not necessarily be a good thing in 

Berserk Mindlink 
certain circumstances. 

Breathe Water Mirage 

Ciure Malady Perserverance SPpIirRIitT BLloOCckK 
Dismiss Elemental Reflection Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate 

Dismiss Magic Ripen Spirit Block is a powerful way of preventing the malign influ- 
ences of spirits. The recipient receives complete protection from 

Elemental Summoning Sacred Band 
spirits with an Intensity of up to half the Intensity of the miracle 

Enthrall Shield 
(rounded up). So an acolyte invoking the spell at an Intensity of 7 

Fear Soul Sight 
could protect themselves from Intensity 4 spirits. 

Tortify Spirit Block This miracle protects against spiritual assault only. Thus it pre- 
Harmonise Steadfast vents discorporation, spirit combat, possession, and the like. On the 
Heal Wound Sureshot other hand, it provides no warding against the spells of a Haunt or 

Tlusion True Weapon physical attacks of an incorporated Predator Spirit for example. 

SPpIirRIitT BLloOCckK EFfFfEeCcTtIivVeEnNEeSsSs 
Acolyte Spells Summary 

Intensity Recipient is Safe from Spirits of... 
Beast Form Exorcism 

1-2 Intensity 1 
Bind Ghost Fecundity 

3-4 Intensity 2 or lower 
Bless Crops Heal Body 

5-6 Intensity 3 or lower 
Call Winds Heal Mind 

7-8 Intensity 4 or lower 
Chameleon Leaching 

9-10 Intensity 5 or lower 

Clear Skies Pacify Each +2 +1 Intensity 

Cloud Call Propitiate 

Consecrate Raise Undead 
StTeEaADdFfAaSsTt 

Corruption Sunspear 
Area (Metres), Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate, Resist (Willpower) 

Cure Sense Thunderclap Used when facing overwhelming odds or terrifying challenges, 
Entangle this miracle renders those within its area immune to any natural 

mental or emotional manipulation. Magical attacks which generate 
a similar effect, such as Fear, Fanaticism, Domination, and the like, 

Priest Spells Summary 
must exceed the Magnitude of the miracle to stand a chance of 

Awaken 
affecting the target. 

Earthquake 

Excommuncation SuUNnSsPpEeaARr 
Extension Duration (Instant), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Acolyte, Resist (Evade) 

Growth Sunspear summons a shaft of blazing light down from the sky to 

Heart Seizure blast a single target. If not evaded, the scorching light will burn the 
victim for 1d6 damage per two points of Intensity in every hit loca- 

Obliterate 
tion. Natural and worn armour counts against this damage. This 

Rain of (Substance) 
miracle will only function in direct sunlight. 

Rejuvenate 

Resurrect SuURrEesShHoOTt 
Sever Spirit Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Initiate 

Sureshot magically guides the trajectory of missiles thrown or 
fired by the recipient so that they almost always hit, no matter the 
situational modifiers or cover; provided at least some part of the 
target is visible, and they are within range of both the miracle and 
the weapon itself. Any failed ranged weapon attack roll is treated as 
a success instead. Fumbles, normal successes and critical successes 

190



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

remain unaffected. The target of the missile attack can still attempt 
to Parry or Evade as normal. 

THhUuNnDdEeRrCcLlAaPp 
Area (Tens of Metres), Duration (Minutes), Rank Acolyte, Resist 

(Endurance) 
This miracle summons a powerful blast of thunder from the 

open sky, to smite down foes. All non-cult members must resist the 
magic. Those who fail are knocked prone by the expanding wall of 
sound, and struck deaf for the remainder of the miracle. Should 
anyone fumble the resistance roll against the spell, they are struck 
permanently deaf. Also, any items of glass or pottery will shatter 
automatically within the area of the spell. 

TRruUEe (WWEeAaPpOoNn)) 
Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate 
True (Weapon) augments the harm the recipient inflicts when 

wielding a cult-specified close combat weapon. The miracle doubles 
that type of weapon’s damage up to the maximum that the weapon 
can inflict, and increases its Size by one step for the purpose of over- 
coming parries. Thus under the effects of a True (Sword) miracle 
the wielder would roll 1d8 twice for a broadsword, but would not 
receive more than 8 points. Other bonuses, such as Damage Modi- 
fier, are not affected. 

191



