Mythras:  Introduction

oy X 2 o % o F WKW M &K K F A | IS L = < <G| 

Introduction

oy X 2 o % o F WKW MK K EX M T XN 

YTHRAS comes from a long tradition of roleplaying 
 game systems based around a common set of principles, ORrGgAaNnIiSsAaTtIioOnN 

M and using percentile dice (d100 or d%) to resolve most MyTHRAS 1§ divided into 16 chapters and an appendix. 
activities. There are several similar systems available, all of them 
broadly compatible, but each with their own nuances and unique CHhAaPpTtEeRrSs 1  tToO 3:: CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr CRrEeAaTtIioOnN 
approaches. Character creation is covered in these three chapters, with each 

The core rules are straightforward and intuitive; usually, a player chapter building on the last. Basic Character Creation starts the pro- 

rolls d100 and aims to score equal to, or less than, a value (a skill or cess with Culture and Community, and Careers and Development 

passion, for instance) on his or her character sheet that represents a adding further depth. Players should start here to create their first 

certain chance of success. However, the game includes many rules MyTHRAS characters. 

that add greater depth, modify results or enhance the play experi- 
CHhAaPpTtEeRr 4:: SKkIiLlLlSs 

ence. While most can be considered necessary for play, none are 
Each of the skills used in MYTHRAS are explained in depth, with 

essential. Indeed, if you do not like a rule, find it confusing, or find 
it slows things down, feel free to ignore it completely. As with any descriptions of the different way skills can be employed. 

roleplaying game there will be ambiguities and questions raised: no 
CHhAaPpTtEeRr 5:: ECcoONnOoMmIiCcSs AanNDd EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt 

set of rules will ever cover every eventuality perfectly, and to every- 
This chapter looks at the use of money and social class in MYTH- 

one’s satisfaction. However, where something is unaddressed, there 
RAS, examining income, its use, and different social levels in MyTH- 

should be something in this book that can, with a little tweaking and 
RAS’s cultures. All manner of adventuring equipment, from armour 

a little thought, address it. MYTHRAS is a very flexible, intuitive and 
and weapons, through to tools and vehicles, are then described. This 

forgiving game system. Use the game as you want to and need to. 
chapter also includes rules for building and repairing items. 

Do not be constrained or constrain yourself. Part of MYTHRAS’s lon- 
gevity has been its adaptability, and that adaptability always comes 

CHhAaPpTtEeRr 6:: GAaMmEe MEeCcHhAaNnIiCcSs 
through what its players and referees bring to the table. This is your Rules for a myriad of different situations are covered here, 
game: Your Mrrras Will Vary. including rules for character experience, advancement, and training. 

In bringing you MYTHRAS there is a large roster of people to 
thank: the credits page lists all those involved in helping bring you CHhAaPpTtEeRr 7:: COoMmBbAaTt 
this game. There are, however, a few people worthy of a very special Fighting — close combat and ranged — is this chapter’s focus. It 
mention: describes how combats work, need to be run, the use of Special 

Effects, and other combat techniques. 
& Dr John Hutchinson for his valuable contributions that helped 

get this project underway. 
CHhAaPpTtEeRr 8:: MAaGgIiCc 

& The many, many loyalfans of the game who encouraged us and This is the introductory chapter for MYTHRAS’s five different 
supported us whilst writing the rules. magic systems. It explores the fundamentals of magic in its differ- 

& Qur families for allowing us to have this vision and for sharing ent forms. The chapter offers suggestions and advice on structur- 
it with us. ing magic in a MYTHRAS campaign, and how to gain, manage, and 

We very much hope that you enjoy MyTHRAS. We have enjoyed restore magic points. 

making it for you. 
The Design Mechanism, May 2016 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  InNtTrRoOdDUuCcTtIioOnN 

CHhAaPpTtEeRrSs 9,, 10,, 11,, 12 AanNDd 13:: MAaGgIiCc SyYsStTeEmMSs 
Folk Magic, Animism, Mysticism, Sorcery, and Theism are the Intensity: A spell or magical effect’s level of power. 

different magic systems MYTHRAS uses, each with its own chapter. 
The various differences are explained, and the powers offered by the Magical Discipline: A type of magic, such as Folk Magic, Ani- 

magic system explored. mism, or Sorcery. 

CHhAaPpTtEeRr 14:: CuuULltTSs AanNDd BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs Magical Tradition: A specific grouping of spells or magical effects 

Religious, magical and secular organisations, as well as other within a Magical Discipline. A Mystical Tradition, for example, 
kinds of societies are detailed in this chapter. Cults are an important includes specific magical abilities exclusive to that Tradition. 
part of MyTHRAS, and they are covered in significant detail along 
with templates for many different kinds of cult, order, school and Magnitude: A spell or magical effect’s ability to resist being 

so on for Games Masters and Players to build upon for their own dispelled. 

campaigns. 
Opposed Roll: Where two or more dice rolls are made and the 

CHhAaPpTtEeRr 15:: CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs results directly compared to determine a winner and loser. 
Insects, mammals, fish, and monsters from myth and legend are 

this chapter’s focus. As well as providing statistical entries for well Special Effect: A particular effect generated during combat 
over 50 creatures, extensive notes are given on how to use creatures when one participant secures a better level of dice success than an 
in MYTHRAS games, including using different races as player charac- opponent. 
ters, and designing your own creatures. 

Skill: A capability a character has in a particular field. Skills are 
CHhAaPpTtEeRr 16:: GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy rated on a 1 to 100 (and above) scale. 

This chapter offers copious notes, thoughts and guidance on 
how to Games Master MYTHRAS games. Areas for consideration are Turn: The point at which a character acts during a Cycle. 
summarised, options explored, and different ways of using the rules 
offered. An invaluable chapter for new and old MyTHRAS Games XdY: Where this formula is used — 3d6 for example — the first num- 
Masters alike. ber indicates the number of dice used, and the second indicates the 

type of dice (four sided, six sided, eight sided, and so on). 
APpPpEeNnDdIixX 

Character sheet and other play-aids. 
XdY+n: This formula signifies rolling the appropriate dice and add- 
ing a number. 2d6+6 means roll two six-sided dice and add six to 
the result. 

G(GlLoOsSsSaArRyY oOFf TEerRmMSs 
Many different terms and phrases are used throughout MYTHRAS Diice UssedD iInN TthHEe GAaMmEe 

to denote certain features, functions and game effects. A glossary of MyTHRAS uses the standard range of roleplaying polyhedral dice: 
the most frequent, and important, follows: d4, d6, d8, d10, d12, and d20. Additionally, the game calls for the 

use of a d2 and d3: 
Attributes: Game abilities derived from one or more Characteris- 
tics: Action Points, Hit Points, Magic Points, and so forth. d2: Roll any die. An odds number equals 1 and evens equals 2. Or flip a 

comn. 
Characteristic: One of seven identifiers used in character creation: d3: Roll a six-suded die; 1-2 = 1, 3-4 = 2, 5-6 = 3. 
Strength, Constitution, Size, and so on. 

For a d100, take a pair of d10 and decide which one will be the 
Combat Round: A period of five seconds used to measure the 10s and which the units. The result is a number between 01 and 00 
detailed activities during combat. (100). This is sometimes known as 'd%'. 

Each die has its own uses. D100 is most frequently used for skill 
Cycle: The sequence in which all characters act, taking turns, rolls. D20 is used for identifying a location struck during combat. 
during a Combat Round. The others are used in different combinations generally for weapon 

damage and injuries. 
Dice Step: Used to denote a change from one dice type to another. All the dice used can be bought from good game stores, and 
The usual progression is: 1d2, 1d3, 1d4, 1d6, 1d8, 1d10, 1d12. online, in sets or individually. 

Differential Roll: Where a degree of success is needed to judge the 
outcome of a matching of skills. 

Grade: Used to indicate the progression in difficulty of skills. 

Initiative: A measure of when a character acts during a Cycle. 



