rut DESIGN Reette eNNaassh,h l Lawrence Whitaker 
EC*EI‘AESM & Friends 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs:: 

%403  o o] 3% £ o] B¢ o] KT G7 W W 4 77 KT ¢ T 

yihr 
TGT o 1 (T 2 K 2 201 T 5 21 2 

DEevVeElLoOpPeEdD AanNDd WRrIiTtTtEenN By PLlAaYyTtEeSsTtEeRrSs 
Pete Nash and Lawrence Whitaker Steven Alban, Nathan Baron, David Paul Bass, Mark Burr, Ben Cable, 

Based on material originally created by Steve Perrin, Ray Turney, Warren James Carrington, Chris Donnelly, Colin Driver, Tim Eldred, 

James and Steve Henderson Tim Evans, Elena Tomas Ferré, David Finch, Chris Furness, 

Chris Garland, Chris Gilmore, Tom Griffith, Mark Hare, Kevin Hicks, 
EDdIitmiInNgG John Hutchinson, Sebastian Jansson, Donnel Johnson, Joshua Kitz, 
Lisa Tyler and Brian Pivik Marcus Knapp, Dan Lee, Emma Lee, James Lodge, Adam Lundgren, 

Jordi Mateu Martinez, Bruce Mason, Aiden McAneny, Brad Milburn, 
PRroOOoFf REeAaDdIinNgG 

John Milward, Daniel]  Mooney, Chris Morrell, Alex Morris, 
Ben Monroe and Lisa Tyler 

Blain Neufeld, Eric Oates, Michael Parkin, Peeter Piegaze, 

Christopher Pinder, Ben Quant, Warren Ricker, Graham Robinson, 
DEesigGnN aAnNDd LaAyYoOuUTt 

Sebastian Sandman, Peter Schofield, Nick Southwick, Howard Tytherleigh, 
The Design Mechanism 

Jordi Roma Vega, Silvia Roma Vega, Ioan Wigmore, Erik Willis, 

Brian Wombwell, Russ Zabel 
ARrTtIiSsTtSs 
David Benzal, Simon Bray, Sarah Evans, Alex Ferreiro, 
Eric Lofgren, Dan MacKinnon, Pascal Quidault, Sergio Sandoval, 
Lee Smith, Antonio Vazquez ABboouuUTt tThHEe COoVvEeRr 

In search of the Eight Treasures of Meeros, Anathaym travelled into 

Cover by Pascal Quidault. Rear Cover illustration by Lee Smith. the ancient _forests of Sykei. She knew the risks: Syket had ever been the 
home of the slargr, and it was her hope that she would avoud their hunting 

SPpEeCcIiaALl ThHAaNnKkSs tradls: the map sold to her by that wily merchant seemed reliable, as did the 

John Hutchinson, Carol Johnson, Brian Pivik, Simon Bray, Bruce shueld and spear he'd supplied. 

Mason, and all the members of, and contributors to, The Design Never trust a merchant... 

Mechanism forums Anathaym dudn't hear the slargr - a massive, old male - until it was 
upon her. She barely had time to whisper her Bladesharp spell. The slar- 

FinndD Us ATt gr's huge, clawedf ists seized her shield as she brought it into position, just 
www. thedesignmechanism.com and www.MYTHRASTg. com. as she'd been trained, and the old leather straps, older; perhaps, than the 
Facebook: hitps://www,facebook.com/ The-Design-Mechanism slargr, groaned and snapped. She cursed the merchant but then she was 

G+: https://plus.google.com/communities/1150345850327299832 66 calm. All she needed was to use her spear to place some distance between 
her and the monster... 

The merchant, she decided, would pay later... 

N\ 3 

MYyTtHhRrAaSs is a trraaddeemmark of  ThThe Deessiign Meecchhaanniissm.. Alll rights reserved.. ThThiis editioon of  MyMtYThHrRaASs is copyrright © 201166.. ThThiis book maay not be reprooduced inn 
whoolle or inn parrt by any meeaanss wiithout peermiissssion ffroomm ThThe Deessiign Meecchhaanniissm,, except as quoted ffor puurrppoossees of  illlluustrration,, diiscussssiion,, and game pllaayy.. 
Reprroduuccttion of  the maatteerriiall inn this book ffor the puurrppoossees of  peersonall or corporate prroofifitt,, by phhoottooggrraapphhicic,, electroniicc,, or other meetthodss of  retrieeval is strictly 

prroohhiibbiittedd.. 

For deettaiills of  the MyMtYThHrRaASs Gaatteway liccenssee,, pllease contact ThThe Deessiign Meecchanismm  
(ddeessigingnmmechhanissmm@ggmmaiali.l.ccoomm).). 



Mythras:  Contents

— 
= HoX R O K &R o E n K M & K FE 3 B T= < gl 

COoNnTtEeNnTtSs 
— 

= HoX R O K &R o E KI n K M & K FE 3 B T= < gl 

InNtTrRoOdDUuCcTtIioOnN 4 Equipment 56 

Organisation Armour 57 

Glossary of Terms Accommodation 58 
Clothing 59 

CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 6 Tood 59 
Designing A Character Livestock 59 
Characteristics Tools 60 
Calculating Characteristics Melee Weapons 61 
Attributes Ranged Weapons 61 
Standard Skills Siege Weapons 62 

Vehicles 62 
CuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 13 One Handed Weapons 63 

Culture Shields 63 
Barbarian Two Handed Weapons 64 
Civilised Siege Weapons 64 
Nomadic Vehicles 64 
Primitive Equipment Manufacturing and Quality 65 
Background Events Ranged Weapons 65 
Community 
Families 21 GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 68 
Allies, Contacts, Rivals and Enemies Acid 68 
Passions Action, Time and Movement 69 

Ageing 70 
CAaRrEeEeRrSs 28 Asphyxiation, Drowning and Suffocation 71 

Age Blood Loss 71 
Bonus Skill Points Character Improvement 71 
Starting Equipment Disease and Poison 74 
Magic Encumbrance 77 
Cult Membership Talling 78 
Skills Fatigue 78 
How Skills Work Fires 79 
Standard Skills Healing from Injury 80 
Professional Skills Inanimate Objects 81 
Different Situations Luck Points 81 
Skills Summaries Passions 82 

Survival 82 
Econommiiccs & EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 54 

Traps 82 
Income, Living Standards and Class 54 

Visibility 84 
Bartering and Haggling 55 

— [ 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoNnTtEeNnTtSs 

Weather 84 Miracle Descriptions 182 
Miracles by Cult Rank 190 

CoMmBbAaTt 86 
Components of Combat 86 Cutlts & BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 192 
Combat Styles 86 Cults 192 
Combat Rounds 88 Brotherhoods 193 
Weapon Size and Reach 93 Why Join? 194 
How Combat Works 94 Membership 195 
Special Effects 95 Availability by Culture 196 
Special Effects Summary 100 Progression 196 
Close Combat 101 Ranks 196 
Ranged Combat 107 Benefits 199 
Hit Locations 109 Restrictions 201 
Optional Rules: Rabble & Underlings 111 Sample Gifts 202 

Other Aspects 205 
MMaaggiicc  111122 Cult and Brotherhood Centres 205 

Tailoring Magic 112 Sample Organisations 206 
Magical Disciplines 112 Example Organisations 210 
Magical Traditions 113 
How Many Abilities? 114 CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 214 
Ritualistic Casting Times 115 Intelligence and Instinct 214 
Magical Energy 115 Creature Abilities 214 
Characters & Magic 118 Creatures as Characters 218 
Using Magic 119 The Statistics Block 219 

Creature Competence 219 
FFooilkk  MMaacgiicc  112211 Armed Combat Considerations 222 

The Nature of Folk Magic 121 Designing Your Own Creatures 223 
Access to Folk Magic 121 Creatures 294 
Ubiquitous Folk Magic 122 Chaos Features 275 
Using Folk Magic 122 Non-Human Hit Locations 276 
Folk Magic Spells 123 
Spells 123 GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 278 

This is Your Game 278 
AANnIiMmIisSmM  113300 The Petersen Rules of Good Gaming 278 

"Trance and Binding 130 Preparation and Game Aids 279 
Spirit Societies, Cults & Traditions 131 Creating Characters 280 

Defining Spirits 132 Investigations 282 
Locating and Gaining Spirits 134 Using Passions 282 
Using Spirits 136 Combat 283 
Spirit Combat 137 Social Conflict 287 
Animism Tricks 140 Using Traps 288 
Spirit Types 142 Creatures as Player Characters 289 

Magic 289 
Mysticism 154
MysTicism 154 Cuults and Brotherhoods in the Campaign 290 

Seeking the Truth Within 154 
Paths and Talents 155 IInNdDEexX  229944 
Starting Mystics 155 
Using Mysticism 156 APpPpEeNnDdIiXx:: PLlAaYy AIiDds 301 
Talent Descriptions 157 

SoORrCcEeRrYy 161 
Manipulating the Cosmos 161 
Schools and Spells 163 
Using Sorcery 164 
Spell Descriptions 165 

THhEeIisSmM 178 
Calling on the Gods 178 
Ciults and Miracles 179 
Using Theism 180 



Mythras:  Introduction

oy X 2 o % o F WKW M &K K F A | IS L = < <G| 

Introduction

oy X 2 o % o F WKW MK K EX M T XN 

YTHRAS comes from a long tradition of roleplaying 
 game systems based around a common set of principles, ORrGgAaNnIiSsAaTtIioOnN 

M and using percentile dice (d100 or d%) to resolve most MyTHRAS 1§ divided into 16 chapters and an appendix. 
activities. There are several similar systems available, all of them 
broadly compatible, but each with their own nuances and unique CHhAaPpTtEeRrSs 1  tToO 3:: CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr CRrEeAaTtIioOnN 
approaches. Character creation is covered in these three chapters, with each 

The core rules are straightforward and intuitive; usually, a player chapter building on the last. Basic Character Creation starts the pro- 

rolls d100 and aims to score equal to, or less than, a value (a skill or cess with Culture and Community, and Careers and Development 

passion, for instance) on his or her character sheet that represents a adding further depth. Players should start here to create their first 

certain chance of success. However, the game includes many rules MyTHRAS characters. 

that add greater depth, modify results or enhance the play experi- 
CHhAaPpTtEeRr 4:: SKkIiLlLlSs 

ence. While most can be considered necessary for play, none are 
Each of the skills used in MYTHRAS are explained in depth, with 

essential. Indeed, if you do not like a rule, find it confusing, or find 
it slows things down, feel free to ignore it completely. As with any descriptions of the different way skills can be employed. 

roleplaying game there will be ambiguities and questions raised: no 
CHhAaPpTtEeRr 5:: ECcoONnOoMmIiCcSs AanNDd EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt 

set of rules will ever cover every eventuality perfectly, and to every- 
This chapter looks at the use of money and social class in MYTH- 

one’s satisfaction. However, where something is unaddressed, there 
RAS, examining income, its use, and different social levels in MyTH- 

should be something in this book that can, with a little tweaking and 
RAS’s cultures. All manner of adventuring equipment, from armour 

a little thought, address it. MYTHRAS is a very flexible, intuitive and 
and weapons, through to tools and vehicles, are then described. This 

forgiving game system. Use the game as you want to and need to. 
chapter also includes rules for building and repairing items. 

Do not be constrained or constrain yourself. Part of MYTHRAS’s lon- 
gevity has been its adaptability, and that adaptability always comes 

CHhAaPpTtEeRr 6:: GAaMmEe MEeCcHhAaNnIiCcSs 
through what its players and referees bring to the table. This is your Rules for a myriad of different situations are covered here, 
game: Your Mrrras Will Vary. including rules for character experience, advancement, and training. 

In bringing you MYTHRAS there is a large roster of people to 
thank: the credits page lists all those involved in helping bring you CHhAaPpTtEeRr 7:: COoMmBbAaTt 
this game. There are, however, a few people worthy of a very special Fighting — close combat and ranged — is this chapter’s focus. It 
mention: describes how combats work, need to be run, the use of Special 

Effects, and other combat techniques. 
& Dr John Hutchinson for his valuable contributions that helped 

get this project underway. 
CHhAaPpTtEeRr 8:: MAaGgIiCc 

& The many, many loyalfans of the game who encouraged us and This is the introductory chapter for MYTHRAS’s five different 
supported us whilst writing the rules. magic systems. It explores the fundamentals of magic in its differ- 

& Qur families for allowing us to have this vision and for sharing ent forms. The chapter offers suggestions and advice on structur- 
it with us. ing magic in a MYTHRAS campaign, and how to gain, manage, and 

We very much hope that you enjoy MyTHRAS. We have enjoyed restore magic points. 

making it for you. 
The Design Mechanism, May 2016 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  InNtTrRoOdDUuCcTtIioOnN 

CHhAaPpTtEeRrSs 9,, 10,, 11,, 12 AanNDd 13:: MAaGgIiCc SyYsStTeEmMSs 
Folk Magic, Animism, Mysticism, Sorcery, and Theism are the Intensity: A spell or magical effect’s level of power. 

different magic systems MYTHRAS uses, each with its own chapter. 
The various differences are explained, and the powers offered by the Magical Discipline: A type of magic, such as Folk Magic, Ani- 

magic system explored. mism, or Sorcery. 

CHhAaPpTtEeRr 14:: CuuULltTSs AanNDd BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs Magical Tradition: A specific grouping of spells or magical effects 

Religious, magical and secular organisations, as well as other within a Magical Discipline. A Mystical Tradition, for example, 
kinds of societies are detailed in this chapter. Cults are an important includes specific magical abilities exclusive to that Tradition. 
part of MyTHRAS, and they are covered in significant detail along 
with templates for many different kinds of cult, order, school and Magnitude: A spell or magical effect’s ability to resist being 

so on for Games Masters and Players to build upon for their own dispelled. 

campaigns. 
Opposed Roll: Where two or more dice rolls are made and the 

CHhAaPpTtEeRr 15:: CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs results directly compared to determine a winner and loser. 
Insects, mammals, fish, and monsters from myth and legend are 

this chapter’s focus. As well as providing statistical entries for well Special Effect: A particular effect generated during combat 
over 50 creatures, extensive notes are given on how to use creatures when one participant secures a better level of dice success than an 
in MYTHRAS games, including using different races as player charac- opponent. 
ters, and designing your own creatures. 

Skill: A capability a character has in a particular field. Skills are 
CHhAaPpTtEeRr 16:: GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy rated on a 1 to 100 (and above) scale. 

This chapter offers copious notes, thoughts and guidance on 
how to Games Master MYTHRAS games. Areas for consideration are Turn: The point at which a character acts during a Cycle. 
summarised, options explored, and different ways of using the rules 
offered. An invaluable chapter for new and old MyTHRAS Games XdY: Where this formula is used — 3d6 for example — the first num- 
Masters alike. ber indicates the number of dice used, and the second indicates the 

type of dice (four sided, six sided, eight sided, and so on). 
APpPpEeNnDdIixX 

Character sheet and other play-aids. 
XdY+n: This formula signifies rolling the appropriate dice and add- 
ing a number. 2d6+6 means roll two six-sided dice and add six to 
the result. 

G(GlLoOsSsSaArRyY oOFf TEerRmMSs 
Many different terms and phrases are used throughout MYTHRAS Diice UssedD iInN TthHEe GAaMmEe 

to denote certain features, functions and game effects. A glossary of MyTHRAS uses the standard range of roleplaying polyhedral dice: 
the most frequent, and important, follows: d4, d6, d8, d10, d12, and d20. Additionally, the game calls for the 

use of a d2 and d3: 
Attributes: Game abilities derived from one or more Characteris- 
tics: Action Points, Hit Points, Magic Points, and so forth. d2: Roll any die. An odds number equals 1 and evens equals 2. Or flip a 

comn. 
Characteristic: One of seven identifiers used in character creation: d3: Roll a six-suded die; 1-2 = 1, 3-4 = 2, 5-6 = 3. 
Strength, Constitution, Size, and so on. 

For a d100, take a pair of d10 and decide which one will be the 
Combat Round: A period of five seconds used to measure the 10s and which the units. The result is a number between 01 and 00 
detailed activities during combat. (100). This is sometimes known as 'd%'. 

Each die has its own uses. D100 is most frequently used for skill 
Cycle: The sequence in which all characters act, taking turns, rolls. D20 is used for identifying a location struck during combat. 
during a Combat Round. The others are used in different combinations generally for weapon 

damage and injuries. 
Dice Step: Used to denote a change from one dice type to another. All the dice used can be bought from good game stores, and 
The usual progression is: 1d2, 1d3, 1d4, 1d6, 1d8, 1d10, 1d12. online, in sets or individually. 

Differential Roll: Where a degree of success is needed to judge the 
outcome of a matching of skills. 

Grade: Used to indicate the progression in difficulty of skills. 

Initiative: A measure of when a character acts during a Cycle. 



Mythras:  Characters

oy X 2 o % o F WKW M &K K F A | IS L = < <G| 

Characters

oy X 2 o % o F WKW MK K EX M T XN 

his chapter outlines the initial steps for Character Creation. 
CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr COoNnCcEePpTt 

The following chapters provide additional detail, but the 
T A good place to start is to have some idea of what sort of charac- 

essentials are found here. 
ter you want to play; a hardened warrior for example, or a cunning 

Every player in MYTHRAS controls a character. A character is the 
thief. Your character concept does not need to be elaborate at this 

player’s alter-ego, his role in the game, and is usually very different, 
stage; simply an idea that will help guide certain choices such as 

physically and mentally, to the player. MYTHRAS characters can be 
race and profession. A few character ideas are listed to provoke your 

from a variety of races — although humans are probably the most 
imagination. 

common, and certainly the best choice for beginning players — and 
every race is defined in the same way. &' Fierce barbarian hunter 

The basic character is defined by a series of different elements « Young, naive wizard 
that describe the character’s capabilities. These elements are: &K Bad-tempered gemstone miner 

&K Chivalrous, yet disgraced champion 
& Characteristics: such as Strength or Charisma 

& Suspicious, spiril-worshipping shaman 
& Attributes: things like Height or Movement 

& Overly-curious explorer-scholar 
& Standard Skills: expertise in fundamental abilities which 

&K Unscrupulous mercenary 
everyone shares 

Most of these elements are described in terms of numbers, and 
some are dependent on or calculated by others. What each element NoNn-HUuMmAaNn SPpEeCcIiEeSs 
means, and how they are determined, is described in the following Humans are the easiest characters to play and are probably the 
sections. most common race found in most MYTHRAS campaigns, but one need 

not be confined to just humans. It is possible to play just about any 
sapient species because all creatures, regardless of type, are defined 
in the same way. The Creatures chapter offers a number of alterna- 

DEesiIgGnNiInNgG A tives along with detailed character creation options for non-human 

CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr species. However, if this is your first MYTHRAS character, stick with 
the rules for humans given in this chapter before branching out into 

Characters are usually recorded on a character sheet, which is 
something more exotic. 

a handy way of organizing all the information about the charac- 
ter. A blank character sheet is included on pages 302-303, but it 
is recommended that you first design your character using scratch 
paper, and then transfer the information to a character sheet once CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCcSs 
you have gone through each step of the character creation process. Every sapient creature, be it human, elder race, or monster, is 
Work through each element one step at a time before proceeding to defined by seven characteristics. Each characteristic tells you some- 
the next. Use a pencil and have an eraser handy; certain numbers thing about your character; how strong or fast he or she is; how 
such as skill values will change several times during the character clever or healthy. Characteristics are at the core of every MYTHRAS 
creation process. 

Iv] 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

character;, and form the basis for most of the other elements such as ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Attributes and Skills. The seven characteristics are: The cover of this book shows a_female warrior, Anathaym, battling for 

& Strength (STR) her life against a creature intent on killing her. ‘T hroughout MyTHRAS we’ll 
be using Anathaym as an example of a character and, through her;, showing 

« Constitution (CON) 
& Size (SIZ) how the MYTHRAS rules work. Her saga begins here, with character creation. 

& Dexterity (DEX) Emma, the player is creating her furst MYTHRAS character and has already 
decided that she will call her Anathaym. Emma’s Games Master;, Steve, has 

& Intelligence (INT) 
& Power (POW) lold all the players that hus MrTHRAS campaign will be set in a fantasy world 

& Charisma (CHA) based heavily on ancient Greece, so Emma and her fellow players, Dave, 
Colin, ando, know a little about the world their characters will inhabit, and 

Before calculating the characteristics, the following section how to picture 1. 
explains what each represents. Anathaym’s world centres on a city-state called Meeros. The rules exam- 

ples make mention of Meeros frequently, its inhabitants and general culture 
StTrReEnNgGtThH (SSTTR)) (which @s late Bronze Age). Meeros’s enemaes are the barbarians known as 

STR represents physical strength: how much one can lift, how the Badoste Warlords. 
hard one can hit, and so on. Characters with a high STR As well as Anathaym several other example characters are used: Kara 
are likely to be more heavily muscled whilst those with a - Anathaym’s sister and a priestess; Zamotlas - Anathaym’s combat tutor; 
low STR are somewhat on the scrawny side. STR is a Xenos - A Meerish warrior and Anathaym’s hated rival; Kratos - A sorcerer 
component of the Damage Modifier (see page 9). If bent on destroying Meeros; Mju - a wandering mystic of the plateau desert 
a character is reduced to zero STR he lacks the abil- nomads. 
ity to move or lift objects, becoming bedridden until Meeros is used simply as a backdrop for the rules examples; the world 
STR improves somehow (through natural healing or @5 not developed beyond these illustrations, and it does not form a MryTHRAS 
magic, for example). default setting. Games Masters can, of course, use Meeros in their own games 

developing it as they need if they so desire. 
CoonnssTtiitutioonN (CCOON)) 
CON is measure of health and hardiness. 

Dexterity (DEX)
Those with a high CON are physically tough, exteriTY D ) 

Agility, balance, and reflexes are measured by DEX. Char- 
and likely to be more resistant to disease or 

acters with high DEX are fast, nimble, and graceful of move- 
poison. Those with a low CON are less resil- 

ment. Those with a low DEX tend to be lumbering and 
ient, and may be prone to sickness and tire 
quickly. CON is a component in deter- clumsy. DEX is an important aspect of Action Points (see 

mining Hit Points (see page 10), and page 8), and Initiative Bonus (see page 10). If a character 
is reduced to zero DEX they suffer functional paralysis, 

Healing Rate (see page 9). If CON falls 
unable to move until the situation is rectified. 

to zero for any reason the character 
dies. 

InNtTeElLlLiIgGeEnNcCEe (IINNT)) 
INT is measurement of cognitive ability. It indicates 

Size (SI1Z) 
the capacity for a character to think both logically and 

SIZ measures mass and helps indicate 
height and weight. The larger the SIZ the creatively. Those with a lower IN'T' score are not neces- 

heavier or bigger the creature is likely to sarily stupid, but they are likely to be constrained in how 
creatively they can employ their wits. Creatures with an 

be. Most creatures” SIZ has a higher min- 
INT of 7 or below are considered sentient, retaining ani- 

imum value than other characteristics, 
mal level instinct, and able to react to stimuli. Individu- 

representing the smallest example of an 
als with an IN'T" of 8 or higher are deemed fully sapi- 

adult of that race; which in the case 
ent. INT is a factor in calculating Action Points (see 

of humans is 8. SIZ is used to help 
figure Hit Points (see page 10), as page 8), and Initiative Bonus (see page 10). If INT is 

larger, heavier creatures tend to f; reduced to zero the character becomes completely 
mindless. 

have greater endurance against 
damage. SIZ can also be used 

Poweer (PPOOW)) 
to determine a character’s Dam- 

Power is a measurement of a character’s soul, 
age Modifier, since mass helps to 

spirit, inner drive, and capacity for magic. It 
increase the force of a blow. SIZ 

encompasses a number of different things and 
provides rough limits to Height 

is a relatively abstract measurement, but is also 
and Weight, depending on the 

one of the most important. POW is the charac- 
character’s body frame (see page 9). 

teristic that marks a character out to the gods 
If SIZ drops below the species min- 

or other supernatural powers, and is an 
imum they are considered to have 

indication of divine or magical poten- 
wasted away to the point they are 

tial, as well as being an indication of 
bedridden. 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

the force of their personal determination. POW governs a charac- 
PooiiNnnTts Buiildp 

ter’s Magic Points (see page 10), and Luck Points (see page 10). If a 
Instead of rolling dice to determine characteristics, players build 

character’s POW ever drops to zero they lose all independent will. 
their character from a preset pool of 80 points. Certain rules apply 

CHhAaRrIisSmMaA (CCHA)) to the points build option: 

Charisma measures personality, and is independent of physical 
« 1 point in a characteristic costs 1 Point from the Points Build 

appearance. Someone with a high CHA for example, might be ugly 
pool 

or plain to look at, but blessed with a charm and wit that more than 
& Characteristics cannot be lwer than the minimum value or 

compensates for not being handsome. Likewise a low CHA might 
greater than maximum value of that characteristic 

indicate someone who is radiantly beautiful but utterly shallow or 
& All Characteristic Points must be used in the design process. 

simply meek. A good CHA is often useful for those who wish to 
Points cannot be held over or used for anything else. 

be leaders or centres of their local community. Diehard loners and 
submissive followers tend towards the other extreme. CHA affects 
a character’s Experience Modifier (see page 9). If CHA is ever falls 
to zero, the character can no longer socially interact with others, 
becoming so painfully shy or antisocial they are ignored or even ATtTtRrIibBUuTtEeSs 
driven away. Each character also has a set of attributes. These are particular 

capabilities derived from the characteristics, or determined by them 
that are used to govern certain factors of game play. The attributes 
are: 

CAaLlCcUuLlAaTtIinNgG 
& Action Points 

CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCcSs & Damage Modifier 

Fach characteristic has a numerical value to determine how & Experience Modifier 

potent it is. Characteristic values can be calculated in one of several « Healing Rate 

ways; either by random dice rolls or by allocating a predetermined & Height and Weight 
number of points. Which method to be used is governed by the « Hit Points 
Games Master. & Tnitiative Bonus 

Games Masters are free to modify rolling techniques or values to & Luck Points 

suit their own campaigns. For instance if the Games Master wished & Magic Points 

randomly rolled player characters to be more heroic, or at least & Movement Rate 

free from handicap, he could permit the re-roll of an unusually low 
result; or allow the player to take up to three points from one char- ACcTtIioOnN POoIiNnTtSs 
acteristic, and assign them to another providing the new scores do How often a character can act in a combat round (see the Com- 
not exceed the normal characteristic range; or even permit one of bat chapter) is determined by Action Points. How they are used is 
the dice used to roll each characteristic to be substituted for its full discussed in more detail on page 91, but to determine a character’s 
value. Likewise if using point allocation, a character can simply be base number of Action Points take the sum of INT and DEX, and 
assigned a larger pool of characteristic points. consult the chart below: 

By default, the options listed below are suggested. 
AccTtIioOnN POoIiNnTtSs 

Diice RoollLl,, InN ORrDdEeRr INT+ DEX Action Points 

Roll the indicated dice for STR, CON, SIZ, DEX, INT, POW 12 or Less 1 

and CHA taking each rolled score as it comes. Since the results of 13-24 2 

these rolls can be somewhat random, it is often better to decide on 25-36 3 

a character concept after the dice are rolled. Otherwise the final Tor every additional 12 points +1 

characteristics may preclude a preconceived role. 
The dice used depends on the creature or race chosen. For 

humans roll 3d6 for STR, CON, DEX, POW and CHA; then The Reasons Why... 
2d6+6 for SIZ and INT. Other species use the dice listed against 
their entry in the Creatures chapter. & INT: Clever characters can more easily exploit openings, and opportuni- 

ties that lend them an edge in combat 

Diice RooLlLl,, AssssIigGnN & DEX: Agile characters react more quickly and can therefore act more 
often during combat 

As above, except that the player may exchange values between 
characteristics with the same dice range. For example when rolling 
up a human, the player could swap values between the STR, CON, DAaMmAaGgEe MOoDIdFifIiEeRr 
DEX, POW and CHA characteristics which share a 3d6 range, or The bonus amount of damage a character inflicts when they 

between the SIZ and INT characteristics with their 2d6+6 range — physically strike or apply force. It is generally used in combat sit- 

but never switch over rolls from one group to the other. uations, but can also be utilised when attempting to break objects. 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

The damage modifier is an extra die roll which is either added to, The Reasons Why... 
or subtracted from, the damage inflicted by the weapon or tool. If a 

& CHA: charismatic characters possess greaterforce of personality and the 
negative damage modifier takes a weapon’s damage to zero or below 

ability to encourage co-operationfrom friends, comrades, and peers 
then no damage at all has been inflicted. 

Add together STR and SIZ, and consult the Damage Modifier 
HEeAaLlIinNgG RAaTtEe 

table: 
After receiving injuries, a character needs to recuperate. Healing 

DAaMmAaGgEe MOoDIdFifIiEerR Rate determines how quickly they naturally recover from wounds. 
Depending on the severity of the injury (see page 80), the Healing 

STR + SIZ Damage Modifier 
Rate denotes how many Hit Points are recovered per day, week or 

5or Less —1d8 
month. 

6-10 -1d6 

11-15 —1d4 HEeAaLlIinNgG RAaTtEe 

16-20 ~-1d2 
CON Healing Rate 

21-25 +0 6 or Less 1 

26-30 +1d2 7-12 2 
31-35 +1d4 13-18 3 
36-40 +1d6 Each 6 points +1 
41-45 +1d8 

46-50 +1d10 

51-60 +1d12 HEeIigGhHTt AanNDd WEeIigGHhTt 
A character’s height and weight depend on two things: SIZ, and 

61-70 +2d6 
the character’s body frame. Three body frames are provided; lithe 

71-80 +1d8+1d6 
(slender, athletic, underweight), medium, and heavy (broad shoul- 

81-90 +2d8 
dered, barrel-chested, overweight). Players are free to pick their 

91-100 +1d10+1d8 
preferred frame depending on how they envisage the character. If 

101-110 +2d10 non-humans are being created, race may limit the choice of body 
111-120 +2d10+1d2 frame. 
121-130 +2d10+1d4 

HEeIigGhHTt aAnNDd WEeIiGgHhTt 
Each 10 points Continue Progression 

N /A Height (cm) Lithe (Kg) Medium (Kg) Heavy (Kg) 

1 1-45 1-5 1-7 1-9 

The Reasons Why... 2 46-80 6-10 8-14 10-18 

3 81-105 11-15 15-21 19-27 
& STR: stronger characlers can apply more bruteforce 

4 106-120 16-20 22-28 28-36 
&K SIZ: greater size usually indicates greater mass or leverage 

5 121-130 21-25 29-35 37-45 

EXxPpEeRrIieEnNcCEe MOoDIdFifIiEeRr 6 131-140 26-30 36-42 46-54 

Over the course of play characters improve their skills and capa- 7 141-150 31-35 43-49 55-63 
bilities. This is achieved through the use of Experience Rolls which 8 151-155 36-40 50-56 64-72 
are explained in more detail on page 71. 

9 156-160 41-45 57-63 73-81 
A character’s CHA score may adjust the number of Experience 

10 161-165 46-50 64-70 82-90 
Rolls the character has, reflecting the relationship he has with his 

11 166-170 51-55 71-77 91-99 
peers, and his reputation in his community. If CHA is high peo- 
ple are willing to put themselves out to help train or support the 12 171-175 56-60 78-84 100-108 

character whilst they undergo tuition. Conversely, if CHA is partic- 13 176-180 61-65 85-91 109-117 

ularly low, there may be some difficulty improving one’s capabilities 14 181-185 66-70 92-98 118-126 

without the assistance of others; finding someone to spar against for 15 186-190 71-75 99-105 127-135 

example. 16 191-195 76-80 106-112 136-144 

17 196-200 81-85 113-119 145-153 

18 201-205 86-90 120-126 154-162 
EXxPpEeRrIieEnNCcEe MOoDIdFifIiEeRr 

19 206-210 91-95 127-133 163-171 
CHA Exp. Modifier 

20 211-215 96-100 134-140 172-180 
6 or Less -1 

21 216-220 101-105 141-147 181-189 
7-12 0 

Each point +5 cm +5 Kg +7 Kg +9 Kg 
13-18 +1 

Each 6 points +1 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

Hiit PoiiNnTts PEeRr LoOCcAaTtIioOnN                                                         CONN++SSIIZ 
Location 1-5 6-10 11-15 16-20 21-25 26-30 31-35 36-40 +5 pts 
Leg 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 +1 
Abdomen 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 +1 
Chest 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 +1 
Each Arm 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 +1 
Head 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 +1 

To calculate height and weight, which is measured in centimetres Luck POoIiNnTtSs 
and kilos, cross reference SIZ with the body frame selected. The Luck Points represent that strange force differentiating adven- 
result is a range of values that your character’s height and weight turing heroes from everyday folk. Call it fate, karma or simple good 
falls into. You should choose the actual value from within this range. fortune. Luck Points can be used to: 

The Height and Weight table can, of course, be used to deter- 
mine the physical properties of anything, but is primarily designed & Re-roll the dice, if they are unfavourable 

to reflect humanoids. Other creatures however can have more & Mitigate physical damage or other unfortunate circumstances 

extreme body frames beyond those given here. See the Creatures & Gain an edge at a vital moment in combat 

chapter, page 224. 
Exactly how they are used, and when, is described on page 81. 

HiiTt POoIiNnTtSs 
Once a Luck Point is spent, the pool decreases; when one is out 

Hit Points represent how much injury an area of the body can 
of Luck Points, no more are available — unless the Games Master 

withstand before it becomes useless, possibly resulting in incapacita- 
makes an impromptu award — until the next game session when they 

tion, and ultimately the character’s death. The body of every crea- 
replenish to their normal value. 

ture is divided into separate locations — humans for example have 
seven; the head, chest, abdomen, arms, and legs — each location with 

Luck PoiiNnTts 
its own hit points. 

POW Luck Points 
Some creatures, such as monsters or different classes of animal, 

6 or Less 1 
by their very nature often have radically different body structures, 
yet each location they possess still has Hit Points. When a location’s 7-12 2 

hit points are reduced to a certain level through damage of any 13-18 3 

kind, then the character suffers certain consequences that reflect the Each 6 points +1 

severity of the injury. For further information concerning wounds 
The Reasons Why... 

see page 80. 
& POW: power is a measure of luck and divine favour; a gift of 

To calculate the Hit Points of each location, add CON and SIZ 
fate, or the ability to cheat it 

together and cross-reference on the Hit Points table. 

The Reasons Why... 
MaAaggGic PoIiNnTts 

& CON: healthy, resilient individuals can withstand more punishment than Mystical abilities and spells cast in MYTHRAS usually rely on 

Sraler ones Magic Points. Since the availability of magic may be limited by a 

&K SIZ: greater bulk helps absorb damage, and reduce the significance of campaign setting or to specific magical professions, some characters 

an tmjury will find this Attribute superfluous. 
Tor those who can utilise such powers, a character’s Magic Points 

are equal to their POW. These points are used to cast spells, the cost 
InNIitTiIaAtTIivVeE BOoNnUuSs of which is dependent on the type of magic used. When the caster 

The moment at which someone reacts in combat is governed 
runs out of Magic Points he has exhausted his ability to cast any 

by initiative. Initiative Bonus acts as a modifier to initiative rolls; 
spells until they are replenished. 

the higher the bonus, the faster one responds in a combat situation, 
determining when you can act. FFurther factors — armour for exam- The Reasons Why... 
ple — modify it. The Combat chapter goes into more detail on how 

& POW: Power is a measure of both willpower — used to command the 
Initiative works (see page 90). 

magical fabric — and the psychic strength the character channels from 
Initiative Bonus is the average of the DEX and INT 

their environment 
characteristics. 

The Reasons Why... MOoVvEeMmEeNnTt RAaTtEe 
Movement is not calculated from Characteristics but is a default 

K INT: clever fighters can predict attacks and anticipate their opponent’s value which differs between species. The base Movement Rate for 
strategies humans is 6 metres, although certain skills can improve this. The 

& DEX: faster characters react and respond more quickly than slower ones section on Movement, on page 69 offers more detail. 

10



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

TANDARD KILLS ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Standard Skills Emma prepares to create Anathaym, a human adventuress. The cam- 

By default, every Adventurer has a range of Standard skills paign uses the assigned dice 10ll method, so characteristic rolls are madef urst, 
allowing him to perform a variety of actions with varying degrees of and then allocated to the characteristics as the players wish. Emma rolls the 
expertise. These skills are detailed more fully in the Skills chapter, Jollowing on 3d6: 11, 7, 15, 9, and 16. Since humans calculate therr SIZ 
but cover a range of everyday activities and local knowledge which and INT using different dice, she then rolls 2d6+6 twice, and gans a 10 
anyone can use without specialised training. At this point of charac- and 14. After some thought Emma assigns them thus: STR 11, CON 13, 
ter creation, players will only need to know the base values of each SIZ 10, DEX 16, INT 14, POW7, CHA 9 
Standard skill. For a human, Anathaym s of average strength, andf airly hardy. She is 

The basic score of each Standard skill is determined by the sum small, reasonably smart, yet ts somewhat unlucky. On the other hand she has 
of two characteristics or a multiple of a single characteristic. The excellent reflexes. Last but by no means least, her charisma s a little below 
value represents the character’s innate competence in a given area, average, probably indicating she is slightly shy. 
in effect their raw talent before any formative training received as Characteristics assigned, Emma now figures Anathaym’s attributes. 
part of his culture and profession. 

The Standard Skills Table shows how the basic values are cal- Action Points: with INT and DEX totaling 30, Anathaym has 3 
culated, along with a brief description of what the skill is and does. Action Points. She can think and act quickly in perilous situations. 
The score represents the percentage chance of success for a skill; so, Damage Bonus: Anathaym’s STR 11 and SIS 10 give a lotal of 
an Athletics score of 25 is expressed as 25%. How skill percentages 21, which means she has no Damage Bonus. Although Anathaym has a small 
work, and more detailed skill descriptions are provided in the Skills plysique, her strength partially counteracts her stature, preventing any loss of 
chapter. power when attempting to damage something 

Note that the basic percentages for some skills will be modified Experience Modifier: Anathaym’s CHA 9 resulls in no Experience 
by both culture and profession, so these starting values will change Modifier. Anathaym s somewhat unassuming, finding it a little difficult to 
as character creation progresses. makef riends and accept others into her trust. 

Healing Rate: Anathaym’s CON 13 results in a Healing Rate of 3. 
StTaAnNdDAaRrdD SKkIiLlLlSs 

Wihilst unexceptional in terms of size and strength, Anathaym healsfrom her 
Skill Basic Percentage wounds quickly. 
Athletics STR+DEX Height & Weight: Emma has decided that she would like Anathaym 

Boating STR+CON lo be slender. So she cross references Anathaym’s SIS on the Lithe column_for 
her Weight. At SI 10 she s between 161 and 165 centimetres tall— Emma 

Brawn STR+SIZ 
seltles on 165 — and she weighs between 46 and 50 kilos. Emma decides 

Conceal DEX+POW 
that Anathaym is at the lower end of the scale, and opts for 47kg Emma 

Clustoms INTx2 
reasons that Anathaym s willowy to the point of looking ascetically thin— an 

Dance DEX+CHA 
appearance which leads many to underestimate her. 

Deceit INT+CHA Hit Points: CON 13 and SIZ 10 means Anathaym’s Hit Points will 
Drive DEX+POW be average, her hardiness compensating for her small, slight frame. Adding 
Endurance CON x2 CON and SIZ gwes a result of 25 which denotes that she has 5 Hit Points 
Evade DEX x2 in her Head and Legs, 7 in her Chest, 6 in her abdomen, and 4 in her Arms. 

First Aid INT+DEX Anathaym is tougher than she looks. 

Influence CHA x2 Initiative Bonus: With INT 14 and DEX 16, Anathaym has a 
Initiatwe Bonus of 15. She ofien actsf irst in combat, seizing the initiative. 

Insight INT+POW 
Luck Points: Anathaym has a POW of 7 which grants her 2 Luck 

Locale INT x2 
Points. Thus, twice a game session, she can call upon these Luck Points to aid 

Native Tongue INT+CHA 
her in a variety of different ways. 

Perception INT+POW POW 7 gives Anathaym only 7 Magic Points. She wsn’t particularly 

Ride DEX+POW concerned; she’s smart and agile, and those traits are more important to her. 

Sing CHA+POW 

Stealth DEX+INT Anathaym’s Standard Skills work out as follows: 
Athletics 27 %, Boating 24%, Brawn 21%, Customs 28%, Dance 

Swim STR+CON 
25%, Deceit 23%, Drive 23%, Endurance 26%, Evade 32%, Fist Aid 

Unarmed STR+DEX 
30%, Influence 18%, Insight 21%, Locale 28%, Native Tongue 25%, 

Willpower POW x2 
Perception 21 %, Ride 25%, Sing 16%, Sleight 25%, Stealth 30 %, Swim 
24%, Unarmed 27 %, Willpower 14%. 

Clearly at this stage her weakest Standard Skill ts Willpower, reflecting 
her shyness and lack of self-confidence; whereas her best s Evade indicating 
Anathaym’s natural grace and coordination. These raw talents will bef urther 
improved by her cultural upbringing and chosen profession as described in the 
Jollowing two chapters. 

11



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 
A Combat Style is the skill relating to fighting and the use of 

weapons. It is a diverse skill with many specialisations related to 
the culture or profession which teaches it. Most fighting traditions 
encompass training in multiple weapons, along with the techniques 
required to use them all effectively, whether singly or in combi- 
nation. In addition they often assume a situational element, such 
as fighting as close order infantry or whilst mounted. Therefore a 
Combat Style is an umbrella skill that melds together many related 
aspects of fighting under a single ability, removing the need to pur- 
chase multiple sub skills. 

All Combat Styles have a Basw Percentage equal to STR+DEX. 
Since most people can pick up a weapon and instinctively either 

swing, throw or fire it, Combat Styles are considered Standard Skills. 
Yet due to their potentially diverse nature, they are categorised and 
defined separately, under names suitable to the genre of the game 
setting. 

For example, a campaign centred on professional gladiators, where set-piece 
bouts between conflicting weapon techniques is important, a character might learn 
the Combat Style (Retiarius) or Combat Style (Murmallo); whereas a travelling 
merchant campaign mightf eature wandering tribesmen with Combat Style (Horse 
Nomad) instead. The precise weapons covered by a particular style are normally 
defined by the Games Master (forfurther details see Combat page 88). 

Characters learn Combat Styles as part of their culture and pro- 
fession, as described in the following two chapters. 

12



Mythras:  Culture & Community

— — 
=&H x )( I < i KI 0 S (LR SO QR <N B o B LB | 2 < B < e 

Culture & 
Community

— — 
= i X o2 oM oK GOn X jad 

Yy m KW S (LR SO QR <N B o B LB | 2 < B < e 

ulture and community play an important part in MYTHRAS personal interests, and have the option of learning a cultural Com- 

C character creation. Culture determines the kind of society bat Style. 
in which the character was raised, and so prescribes certain Professional skills are further explained in the Skills chapter on 

outlooks and philosophies he or she might have. More practically, page 44, but in brief they represent those skills which cannot be 
culture helps define the values of the various skills that shape your attempted without years of rigorous study and specialised training. 
character’s overall capabilities. Community details the family, both Whereas a character has a basic ability in all Standard Skills, they 
immediate and extended, which helps to define kinsfolk and rela- have zero ability in any Professional Skill unless chosen as part of 
tionships with them. their cultural upbringing or career. 

When applying cultural skills perform the following steps: 

& Apply the static bonuses to Customs and Native Tongue: 

CUuLlTtUuRrEe these are +40% to each, irrespective of the culture chosen. 

There are four basic human cultures: Barbarian, Civilised, & Select three Professional Skills from the options offered 

Nomadic and Primitive. & If desired, select a single Combat Style 

A description of each cultural background follows and includes & Distribute 100 points amongst the listed Standard Skills, the 

a view of the culture from the perspective of one of its members. chosen Professional Skills, and the Combat Style (if selected), 

Incorporated in the description is a list of skill bonuses and new skills increasing that skill by 1% for every point spent on improving 

appropriate to that culture. Players should apply the skill bonuses it. Players are free to choose how much each skill is improved 

immediately to the Standard skills on their Character Sheet, and by, but each skill must receive a minimum of 5% and cannot 

add the additional new skills, known as Professional Skills (intro- receive more than 15%. 

duced in the next chapter), to the appropriate section of the sheet. 
Chosen Professional Skills start off at their base characteristic 

In many cases a cultural background lists a range of skills and invites 
value as per Standard Skills. Some Professional Skills such as Crafts, 

the player to pick one, or more, that will gain a bonus: in this way 
Languages or Lores offer choice of a specialisation. In these cases 

players from the same cultural background can ensure that their 
the speciality chosen should be one which suits that culture. 

adventurers are different in the areas they have developed. 
Characters need not invest any points into a Combat Style if they 

Also note that each culture comes with several Passions (see 
are disinclined to do so, as some cultures have non-combatant mem- 

page 82). Passions are optional rules for MYTHRAS but they can add 
bers whether due to gender, caste or philosophy. Cultural Combat 

a great deal of depth and characterisation to the adventurer you 
Styles usually reflect the informal training received by the commu- 

are creating. If Passions are being used, then the Cultural Passions 
nity for hunting, personal protection or civil defence. 

define ingrained preferences and prejudices for that culture. If Pas- 
Each culture comes with a range of evocative names for Combat 

sions are not required, then simply ignore the entries. 
Styles. However, no weapons are defined, because Combat Styles 
are intended to be flexible tools for the Games Master to tailor the 

CUuLlTtuURrAaLl SKkIiLlLl POoIiNnTtSs weapons to the particular culture or setting. Refer to the Combat 
Each culture lists a variety of Standard Skills that the charac- Style section in the Combat chapter for further guidance. 

ter learns as part of his formative development within that society. 
These are core abilities which all characters from the same specific 
culture improve to some degree. Characters also learn a number 
of more specialised or esoteric Professional Skills according to their 

13

Iv] 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

BAaRrBbAaRrIiaAnN CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 
Tribal in nature, barbarians tend to shun civilisation, view- & Loyalty to Clan Chieftain 

ing those who live in large towns and cities as weak and corrupt. & Love (friend, sibling or romantic lover) 
Although their own settlements are also sedentary, they tend to be & Hate (creature, rival or clan) 
far smaller and closer to nature. Barbarian tribes occupy distinct 
territories, often half tamed wilderness, which they regard as their 
own for hunting, grazing and farming purposes. Most are adept in ThHEe BAaRrBbAaRrIiAaNn'’Ss VOoIiCcEe 
the use of weaponry as they must overcome many dangers through- “The people of the towns and cities call us barbarians because our houses 
out their lives — facing creatures of the wilds or mustering to defend are not made of mortared stone, and we choose not to crush ourselves together like 
their lands against rival tribes. Since they live in small communities oo many fish in a shallow pond. They call us barbarians because we choose 
the ties of kinship and clan are strong elements of their society. not lo write down what we see, hear and say, but to memorise it as song. They 

call us barbarians because we fight amongst ourselves sometimes. They call us 
barbarians because they simply do not understand. Living in brick boxes must do 
something to the wits. 

We choose to be close to the ground that gave rise to all of us. Our homes are 
made from the things we can readily find and shape, and we do not believe in 
butlding hagh or covering the ground in dressed marble. Life is hard; we appreciate 
it that way. 1t us good 1o feel the rain on our cheeks and the sun on our backs as we 
g0 about our business. Why lock ourselves away? The gods created us to experi- 
ence the world, andy ou can’t do that ifyou spend all.your time imprisoned within 
walls. We accept the worldf or what it is and how 1t is. Town and city folk seek 
to make it something else. We appreciate comfort and warmth just like they do, 
but we take life as it comes, not as how we would like it be. A bed of good, fresh 
straw 1s as comfortable as any slab stuffed withf eathers — and probably cleaner, 
and certainly betterfor the back. 

Do not believe what you hear from them about our lack of laws. Our laws 
are embodied in our customs and traditions. When we transgress we expect to be 
punished. When we transgress badly we expect the punishment to be bad, too. We 
believe in saying what we mean, meaning what we say and doing what we have 
promused. Some view this as harsh, such as when we stone liars to death, but ths 
means we do not have liars in our mudst. Those templed lo transgress know the 
consequences and think twice. Thus helps us to live in harmony. 

You question our rads? Well, do the cwilisedf olk not make wars? Of course 
they do! When they make war thousands die, innocent victims amongst them. For 
us, we raid lo settle scores and to build our strength — not just the strength of the 
tribe but the strength of character too. We expect to be rarded and our neighbours 
expect us to raid them. Just as the hawk takes the dove on the wing. Life is a cycle 
and we are part of it; and when we raid, a_few might die, but most do not. And 
when we die we are ready for it and unafraid. Through raiding we understand our 
place and keep 1t, just as the wolf knows s territory and keeps that. 

So come and break bread with us. We do not care thatyou live in the stinking, 
narrow, disease_filled streets of Meeros; as a visitor to our hearth you are a guest 
and will be treated as such. You will be served furst, above even the headman, 

SKkIiLlLlSs and we will share with you all that we have, keeping nothing back. In return we 
ask for news and stories, and perhaps a small token of your appreciation for our 

StTaAnNdDaArRdD SKkIiLlLlSs hospatalaty in the form of a song or a dance. Come, the elders are waiting.’ 
Athletics, Brawn, Endurance, First Aid, Locale, Perception; and 

cither Boating or Ride. 

ExAaMmPpLlEe COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs CIiVvIiLliIsSeEdD 
Barbarian Fyrdman, Berserker, Horse Eater, Seaborne Reiver, The Civilised culture is epitomised by a semblance of law and 

Weapon Thegn, Wolf Hunter. order, underpinned by complex social codes, and supported by a 
bureaucracy. Civilised people believe themselves superior to all 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsiIoOnNAaLl SKkIiLlLlSs other cultures because their achievements tend towards perma- 
Craft (any), Healing, Lore (any), Musicianship, Navigate, Sea- nence: sprawling cities, imposing temples, celebratory monuments, 

manship, Survival, Track. and the recording of history and events in books, tomes, and scrolls. 
Of course, this is a thin veneer. The most civilised of cities can be 

14



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

more lawless than any barbarian frontier settlement; and the social dare attack us! We have the most important cily in the whole region. Attacking us 
codes may be cruder than the hospitality rituals of nomads. But the would invite hatredfrom our allies. So we are safe. 
Civilised culture prides itself on its achievements, its infrastructure, Well, yes, of course there’s crime. There’s always someone who isn’t prepared 
its professional artisans, and its ability to easily extend its reach to to work for it and steals instead. Why, only last week my shop was turned over, 
wherever it wishes to go. and the day’s takings stolen. And yes, there are muggings, and murders too, but 

the militia always catch the perpetrators; and when they do! Well, then they’ll see 
our marvellous court in action. The Queen herself presides, you know, and she’s a 
Jair woman. She can tell when someone’s gually just by staring at them. And don’t 
bother appealing; if you’re guilly, you’re off lo the quarries. That’s unless you’ve 
been stealing, in which case you losefingers. 

What 1 like most about the city is the wider communaty. It’s about meeting 
new people every day, each with a new story to tell. 1 like seeing my neighbours, 
even if they are a bit loud sometimes, and 1 like the atmosphere of market day or 
Gods’ Day when everyone’s excited and outfor a good time. I like having a roof 
over my head, and a warm bed to lie in at night (even if it is damp). I like having 
a door I can close on the world when I getf ed up with it, and knowing thatI  don’t 
have to go out with a spear to hunt my next meal. 

Me? Gwe up the city? No chance!” 

NOoMmAaDdIiCc 
Nomadic people are constantly on the move, with no home and 

SKkIiLlLlSs hearth to call their own. They may wander aimlessly about, or 
might have several camps they move to and from throughout the 

StTaAnNdDaArRdD SKkIiLlLlSs year. They raise few crops and instead follow the migrations of ani- 
Conceal, Deceit, Drive, Influence, Insight, Locale, Willpower. mals or fish, perhaps even herding their own domesticated beasts. 

Nomads are adept at subsisting on what they can quickly and easily 
EXxAaMmPpLlEe COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs scavenge from their surroundings, letting nothing go to waste. The 

Citizen Legionary, City-state Phalangite, Levied Archer, Light skills of the nomad culture should be tailored to their environment. 
Skirmisher, Street Thug, Town Militia. Some journey vast distances on foot, others live in caravans or ride 

strange creatures, and some drift across the oceans on great floating 
PRrOoFfEeSsSsiIoOnNAaLl SKkIiLlLlSs 

rafts. 
Art (any), Commerce, Craft (any), Courtesy, Language (any), 

Lore (any), Musicianship, Streetwise. 

CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 
& Loyalty to Town/City 
& Love (friend, sibling or romantic lover) 
& Hate (rival, gang, district or city) 

ThHEe CiiviiLlisseEdD VOoIiCcEe 
Isn’t this af ine city? I mean, isn’t it thef inesty ou’ve ever seen? Safe, too. The 

malitia sees lo that, and althoughyou might see the odd beggar wandering around 
the marketplace you're as likely to be attacked as you are to get eaten by monsters. 
We have rules, you see. Without rules we’re no better than animals. Rules help 
us live together without fighting, and to make things we can sell so that we can 
move up in the world. 

1t’s about order and a certain degree of comfort. And it’s about education. 1 
have listened to the priests and studied with philosophers, which helps me run my SKkIiLlLlSs 
business. Because I run my business I can buy education for my children so they 
can run businesses loo, when they’re older. I can buy my wife the things we need to StTaAnNdDaArRdD SKkIiLlLlSs 
bring up the children, and sometimes there’s a little left overfor a treat. Sometimes. Endurance, First Aid, Locale, Perception, Stealth; and two of the 
And to pay the taxes. IL's very important that we pay the taxes. following: Athletics, Boating, Swim, Drive or Ride depending on the 

But mostly it’s about protection. That wall around the cily is there_for more primary mode of travel. 
than show. 1t keeps the Badoshi out and lets us live in peace. The garrison patrols 
the borders, and the wall, and alerls us when enemues are near. Not that they’d 

15



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

ExAaMmPpLlEe COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 
Camel Cavalry, Feathered Death Flinger, Horse Lord, Whale PRrIiMmIiTtIivVEe 

Hunter, Wheeled Warrior, Wolf Runner. Of all peoples primitives are those that live closest with the land, 
in tune with its hidden secrets. Other cultures commonly dismiss 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsiIoOnNAaLl SKkIiLlLlSs them as little more than animals, yet they merely eschew the tech- 

Craft (any), Culture (any), Language (any), Lore (any), Musician- nology that so many others take for granted; relying instead on flint 

ship, Navigate, Survival, Track. spears and arrows, and their skill for survival in the wild. Living in 
extended family groups, primitive cultures gather around very sim- 

CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs ple dwellings that can range from caves and areas of natural shelter 
through to lean-tos or very basic huts. Primitives are typically hunt- 

& Loyalty to Tribal Chieftain/Khan er-gatherers with either few, or poorly developed, systems for farm- 

& Love (friend, sibling or romantic lover) ing and husbandry. However, certain cultural beliefs, often based on 

& Hate (creature, rival or tribe) superstitions, can be very well defined. Few primitive cultures have 
developed anything approaching a written language although paint- 
ings and other pictorial symbols serve as a means of communication. 

ThHEe NOoMmAaDd’’s VOoIiCcEe 
In the winter we move down to the shelter of the valleys where our people 

have made camp every yearf orf ifly generations. We wait until the ground thaws, 
lwing all the while on the dried meats and fruts laid down in the autumn and 
protect ourselvesfrom the snow and cold. Lasty ear we arrived in the valley to find 
it had been occupied by savage, diseased wolves, and we had to drive them out 
and cleanse the place with fire. A dozen died in that fight. A dozen hands fewer 
to tend the herd andf orage. 

In the spring we move to the high plateau, where the hunting is good. The 
Great Hunt takes place in that time, when the strong go and_find antelope, leop- 
ard, andy ak, and the rest move the herd up out of the valley. Those are good days, 
and we gwe thanks to the spirits, and sacrifice a cow or two. We meet the other 
clans at the Great Sky Cairn, and exchange news, and gifis. There is always a 
Jeast, and many sore heads, but we agree the business for the year, and discuss 
what the game trails are like, and how the pasture holds out. Last year one clan 
brought with it a monster they had captured and tamed. It was a scaly thing with 
tusks and hide like tree bark; the shamans said it was unnatural, but the other 

clan kept it as a watchdog 
And then in the summer we move out across the high plateau where we graze 

our amimals and gatherf ruits to preparef or the winder. Sometimes we baitle, seek- 
ing to hold the best grasslands, or raid barbarian settlements lurking in thef orest, 
but mostly we know peace. 1t is difficull to keep enemies when you’re always on 
the move. Newther do we waste. Waste is an winsult to the gods! We eat, or find a 
use, for everything we hunt. We honour what nature provides, and do not squander 
at. 1t brings tears to the eyes and heart to see the waste in the stinking cities. 

Why do we follow this life? Because of the animals, because of the seasons! 
The world moves and so must we. If you stay in one place you sap the earth and 
it stops giving. Stay in one place and sooner or later enemzes or monsters_find_you, 
and before you know ityou’re_fighting every day instead of every now and again. 
By moving we learn the land and take its best. If you set down roots, you become 
like a plant and we are not plants. We have legs and we walk and run like the SKkIiLlLlSs 
deer walk and run. We are free and being free we must move_freely. Our hunters 
and herders are strong because we keep our blood moving and stay in time with StTaAnNdDaArRdD SKkIiLlLlSs 
the seasons, moving when the earth and the spirits say it is time to move. Never Brawn, Endurance, Evade, Locale, Perception, Stealth; and one 
stop moving. Even when death claims us, we go to the Great Hunting where all of either Athletics, Boating or Swim. 
s spring and the game s good, and the spirits look after us as we have looked 
after them. ExAaamMpPlLeE COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 

We have a good life.” Flint Death Dealer, Ghost Warrior, Head Hunter, Jaguar Brother, 
Jungle Savage, Savannah Hunter. 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsiIoOnNAaLl SKkIiLlLlSs 
Craft (any), Healing, Lore (any), Musicianship, Navigate, Sur- 

vival, Track. 

16



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Steve, the GM has already decided that the characters are residents of a 

& Loyalty to Chief/Headman cvilised city-state named Meeros, loosely based upon the myths of ancient 
& Love (friend, sibling or romantic lover) Crete. Anathaym s thereforefrom a Civilised culture. 
& Hate (something that scares or intimidates you) She begins by adding the default 40% bonus to Customs and Natwe 

Tongue, then chooses the three Professional Skills she learned growing up 
in Meeros; deciding upon Courtesy 23% (INT+CHA), Lore (Geography) 

ThHEe PRrIiMmIiTtIivVEe VOoIiCcEe 28% (INTx2), and Streetwise 16% (POW+CHA). 
“The world is full of fear It is a wrathful place and we know s wrath. Anathaym now has 100 points lo assign to the listed Standard Skills and 

So we hude. We try to keep the gods happy with sacrifices of blood but still they the three Professional Skills she selected. She applies them thusly: Conceal +5, 
punish us. We asked the wise woman why the gods are so angry, and she told us Deceit +5, Drive +5, Influence +10, Insight +10, Locale +5, Willpower 
it is because we are not perfect, like they are, and it us ourf aull. So now we know. +10, Courtesy +15, Lore (Geography) +10, and Streetwise +15. The 
Can we be perfect? I don’t think so. 1 think the gods like 1t that way. I think they remaining 10 points she withholds since she wishes to learn a Combat Style. 
like having something to blame and then punish. So we fear them. Steve says that, as a citizen of the city, Anathaym can take the Meerish 

Our home 15 the great cave that runs deep into that mountain. When the gods Slinger style, learning as a child the art of slinging which was augmented 
send the monsters to eat us wef lee deep inside whale the warriors hurl their spears with the city’s civic training in shorisword and medium sheeld. The style starts 
and the shaman makes her chants. We paint our victorzes on the cave wall and tell with a base score of 27% (STR+DEX), and she adds her remaining 10 
stortes about them so the children will know that even though the gods are angry points to it. 
at us we are a strong people and want to make things good. We eat the monsters Finally, for her Passions, Anathaym takes Loyalty (City), Love (Sibling), 
we kill and make weapons and toolsfrom the bones. and Hate (Rival). These will be determined later. 

Our wise woman told us that the people who live in the woodlands two days Afier applying her cultural modifiers Anathaym’s skills are: Athletics 
Jrom us made the gods even angrier because they stole the secret of fire, so we 27%, Boating 24%, Brawn 21%, Conceal 25%, Customs 68 %, Dance 

went and killed them. We thought the gods would be pleased with us for killing 25%, Deceit 28%, Drive 28%, Endurance 26%, Evade 32%, Fist Aid 
the thieves but that night they sent a great plague and more monsters, so maybe 30%, Influence 28%, Insight 531 %, Locale 33 %, Native Tongue 63%, 
the wise woman was wrong, but she probably wasn’t. I wonder how you get to Perception 21%, Ride 23%, Sing 16%, Stealth 30%, Swim 24%, 
be a wise woman? Unarmed 27 %, Willpower 24 %o; Courtesy 38%, Lore (Geography) 38%, 

Our chieftain married the young woman who we took as a slave when we and Streetwise 51%; Combat Style (Meerish Slinger) 37 %o. 
killed the enemues, and we know that us wrong because her hair is red. Red is the 
colour of the trickster god but the chieflain won’t listen. He was challenged and 
killed the hunter who challenged him and ate his heart. He gave the brain to hus 
new wife so she might eat and gain some wisdom. Perhaps that’s how you get to 
be a wise woman? Because she has red hair wef ear her; and wef ear the chieflain 
because he’s changed. She’s put a spell on him, we think. That’s probably how 
her people stolefire from the gods. I think she did 1. 

1 made my furst spear yesterday. I knapped the flint myself, and tied it firm 
with the twine I made from dried pig gut. 1t us very straight and very sharp. 1 
went lookingfor an enemy to kill, andf ound someone lost in the hulls notfarfrom 
our cave. I tested my spear on him and it stuck so deep I nearly broke the hafi 
getting it out. I ate hus heart without bothering to make it hot, and now I have his 
soul. I'm not sure I want two souls, so I will go to the wise woman and give her 
the skullfrom the enemy I tested my spear on, and she will take the second soul 
from me. It will be my slave then, and I will make it worship me like a god, and 

1 will make itfear me. 
Because the world us_full off ear” 

BAacCkKgGrRoOuUnNdD EVvEeNnTtSs 
Background Events are notable things that have happened in the your character then do re-roll the event. Background Events should 

character’s life before he began his career as an adventurer. Some enrich the character — not disrupt it. 

are formative; some are fortunate and some are unfortunate. Back- If your starting character is older than the MYTHRAS standard, 

ground Events are optional, but using them adds to the character’s then you may gain multiple rolls on this table (see Age, page 33). If 

history, and can be used by creative players and Games Masters as you roll a result twice, re-roll one of the results. If two results contra- 

hooks for scenarios or even complete campaigns. dict each other either discard both and roll again, or agree with the 

If using Background Events you may feel free to choose an Games Master how best to make both results work together. 

event that appeals or roll randomly. Random rolls may produce The Background Events tables begin on the next page. 

very interesting, but potentially conflicting results. If a roll is not to 
your liking or seriously disrupts the idea and concept you have for 

17



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

BAacCkKgGrRoOuUnNdD EVvEeNnTtSs 
01 A case of mistaken identity resulted in a period of imprisonment or some other punishment for your character. You have long 

wanted to find whoever it was who was responsible for the crime you were punished for. 

02 A curse has been placed upon your family. For generations all children of the opposite gender to your character have died in 
tragic circumstances. It falls to each generation to select one who will find a way to lift the curse, and you are the chosen one. 

03-04 A girl in your community wants you to carry messages to a boy in another community. She pays you well enough and you 
believe that the messages are love letters. But can you be sure? Why are these two not allowed to communicate directly? What 
would happen if they did? What would happen if anyone else found out? And why did she choose you to be her messenger? 

05-06 A group of travelling players visited your community and stayed for several weeks. They performed feats of legerdemain, 
juggling and acrobatics. As a child you were enthralled, and spent as much time as you could with them. Then you were 
kidnapped, carried far away from your homeland and abandoned. How did you escape? Did you even make it home? 

07-08 A priceless object owned or protected by your family was stolen by enemies. On his deathbed the head of the family made 
you swear to retrieve it from the thieves. You’re not sure what the item is or why it is so special, but loyalty to your deceased 
relative drives you to complete your oath. 

09-10 A relative or family member has bequeathed you a secret: the whereabouts of a lost legendary heirloom; the location of an 
imprisoned deity; or maybe the rituals for a special spell. The information is shrouded in family myth, and you have been 
oath-sworn to either protect this secret or find and awaken it. 

11-12 A sibling has been betrothed to someone from your childhood that you consider an enemy. You are forced to make a sullen 
peace with this new in-law but your hatred still burns beneath. What is worse is that you fear your sibling is being turned 
against you. What can you do to set matters to rights? 

13 You believe yourself to be suffering a divine or magical curse. Moan, groan and whinge at every opportunity, or remain 
completely stoic at every misfortune that befalls you in the future. 

14-15 An old, warlike relative has died, bequeathing you a useless suit of armour which will fall apart the first time it’s used. 
However the scratches and dents tell of great battles and a life of adventure. Despite the shoddiness of the armour you are 
very fond of it and, when wearing it, you feel as if the spirit of your relative is watching over you. 

16-17 A scholar, priest or mystic visits your community, and demonstrates his almost supernatural wisdom. You are fascinated by 
what you see but the individual does not remain long enough for you to learn more. You do, however, receive dreams that 
show you meeting up with this person again and learning from him. When, where, and how will form a future part of the 
story. 

18-19 Distant relatives demanded that you be sent to stay with them. Your father could not refuse — why was that? The relatives 
treated you well but were always cold and distant with you, despite insisting that you live with them for several years. On 
returning to your true family, they had also become distant with you. What is at the root of this strangeness? Why have you 
been caught in the middle? 

20 Fate has closely watched over you as you grew to adulthood. Siblings have drowned, friends died from plague, parents 
disgraced, but you have emerged unscathed from everything. Are you truly blessed by the gods? 

21-22 Tor some reason you have shamed your family and have been cast out. What did you do? Is there hope of reconciliation? 
Were you to blame or were you just a scapegoat for someone else? At first you lived on your wits, but people in your 
community grew suspicious and shunned you. 

23-24 It transpires that one of your parents is, in fact, a member of a noble family (and possibly even a prince or princess) who has 
turned their back on their heritage to live a simple life. This does, however, mean you are an heir to a noble estate or title. Will 
you ever realise your inheritance? 

25 On your birthday two years ago it rained frogs. Last birthday it rained lizards. What will it rain this year? More to the point, 
why does it rain strange things on your birthday? 

26-27 Playing one day you discovered a dead man — a warrior — in the cellar or outbuildings. Who was he? And more importantly 
who killed him? Was it your father, or worse still your mother, who had been looking rather nervous of late... 

28-29 Somehow you have picked up a loyal companion or retainer. Maybe a childhood friend; perhaps a hanger-on from some 
chance encounter. This does not necessarily make your companion a welcome presence, but the relationship has somehow 
endured over the years. 

30-31 You come into possession of a mundane item that a friend or family member claims is magical. So far the item has not 
exhibited any magical properties, and it could well be that some form of quest is needed to activate its magical abilities. 
Worse, the item if known about may attract unwelcome attention. What the abilities are remain for the Games Master to 
determine at an appropriate time. 

18



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

1d100 Event 

32 You have been marked as special by the gods. You carry with you a symbol or marking that is of great reverence to a particular 
religion or cult. The gods and the cult in question may be very far from where you were born, and may even be an enemy of 
your culture, but this makes no difference. 

33-34 You have a favoured and beloved pet which follows them everywhere. It has no abilities or special powers, but offers comfort 
and companionship. 

35 You have studied with a noted master, scholar or wise man. Whenever you meet up with the teacher, you can request personal 
tuition for one or more of your related Professional Skills. 

36-37 You have suffered some form of horrific attack that has left you psychologically scarred, and extremely wary about the 
situation or thing which harmed you. This might be nearly dying from drowning, man-eating lions or necromantic magic. 
Whatever it is, gain a new passion of Fear (thing which harmed you) or roleplay your subsequent trepidation. 

38-39 You have sworn a fervent oath with a member of the opposite sex. You are compelled to help this person, and never betray 
him or her. By some intuition you are always aware of their presence in your dreams, and sense any danger he or she is subject 
to even when many miles apart. 

40-41 You were born into a once rich and powerful family that has somehow fallen on rough times or suffered a severe blow to its 
reputation. Perhaps the family name is a mockery, or reviled, or even revered still by those who know the truth. 

42-43 You were born with an unusual sensitivity to a particular substance, species of creature or type of supernatural power. When 
the subject in question is nearby, you suffer a mild physiological effect such as tingling fingers, sneezing or headaches. Upon a 
successful Perception roll you can determine the rough location of the detected thing; 

44-45 You were either born with, or somehow received, a mark, blemish or scar that resembles a glyph. The symbol does not exhibit 
any power yet, but all who see it remark on it — some acting with wonder, and others fear. A quest of some kind is needed to 
awaken the glyph; but is this wise? Only time will tell. 

46 You are magically gifted, attracting the attention of a scrying sorcerer, the priest of a cult or a wandering shaman. If 
permitted, you may choose to enter a magical profession. If magic-using characters are not permitted, you instead become the 
focus of that magician, who desires to extract your inherent power via some suitably nefarious, and possibly fatal, means. 

47 You awoke one morning to find a valuable object, one with significant religious or ruling importance, lying in bed with you. 
The question of how precisely it got there aside, do you keep the object with the intent to sell or use it later, or do you return it, 
thus placing yourself under suspicion of its theft? 

48-49 When you were a child you nearly died from a fatal disease, but since then you have never, ever been ill. Are you simply 
paranoid about any type of infection or do you believe you are immune to any form of contagion? 

50 Several years ago you were attacked by an unidentifiable wild beast, which nearly killed you. The creature vanished but 
since that time you've felt an ominous presence when wandering the edges of your homelands. Thus far the beast has not 
reappeared, yet perhaps it’s merely biding its time. What was the creature, and why is it hunting you? 

51-52 You spent your childhood as a slave before either escaping or being freed. The experience had a significant effect upon you. 
How do you view slavery now? Do you hate and fear it, or did the experience institutionalise you? 

53-54 The eldest surviving member of your family harbours a great secret, and many times they have told you that when you are old 
enough, it will be entrusted to you. What is this secret? When will the time be right? Your Games Master will decide, but until 
then you must be patient. Can you contain your curiosity? 

55-56 As a child you witnessed some ceremony or ritual that had a profound effect on your psyche. The chants and dances haunt 
your dreams, and you feel compelled to discover what it was you witnessed. The outcome of the ritual is unknown, it might be 
for good or ill; you do not know. Its true nature must be discovered through adventuring 

57-58 Your family was hunted by powerful foes. Why is this? Why did your family need to keep moving and hiding? What do the 
pursuers want? Are they still following you? Should you confront them? You are sick and tired of being on the run. 

59-60 You are a bastard-born. Your mother swears your father was a man of note and station, but she herself is of low status, and 
you are considered even lower than she is. Where your father is, no one knows, but you would love to meet him some day and 
discover the truth about him. Perhaps, if reunited with your father, the stigma of your birth might be erased. 

61-62 You are adopted. Your true parents either abandoned you or were killed, and the family that raised you has always accepted 
you as one of their own — except for certain jealous relatives who see you as an imposter, and would gladly have you cast out 
of the family so their own offspring might benefit. You have had to fight their resentment for most of your life but now things 
appear to be coming to a head. 

63-64 You came across a tinker or peddler on the road. He offered to read your fortune for a silver piece, but you had no money, and 
instead offered to share your meal with him, which he accepted. Reading your palm he declared you would become a great 
hero and travel the world, but not before encountering ‘A great sorrow, a great victory, and a great reversal.” You have often 
wondered what he meant because none of those things have come to pass. Might the tinker have been lying? 

19



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

1d100 Event 

65-66 You come from a family that is artistically adept. Their fame has spread far and wide, granting you access to high status 
patrons if you yourself are an artist, craftsman or performer. Conversely it is a constant source of irritation when casual 
acquaintances are taken aback at your lack of talent. 

67-68 A sibling committed a heinous crime that has brought shame on your family. They fled soon after, vanishing entirely, casting 
suspicion on you. Were you yourself falsely blamed for the crime? Or did you willingly confess, to preserve the remnants of 
your family’s honour? Is blood truly thicker than water? 

69-70 You are a twin. Your brother or sister has similar characteristics and skills to yourself but you are clearly different people. Are 
you close, as twins usually are, or estranged? You always seem to know where your sibling is, even if relations between you are 
not good. 

71-72 You are the sole survivor of a horrific catastrophe. Your entire family was wiped out by some tragedy leaving you to fend 
completely for yourself. 

73-74 You met a great hero (or villain) at a time when he or she was unknown. You suspected, perhaps, that this person was destined 
for greatness (or infamy), but you still became friends before you parted. Will they remember you? Will you still be friends? 

75-76 Your elder brother or sister is (or was) a great hero for some reason, and you live somewhat in their shadow. You are desperate 
to prove that you are your sibling’s equal, and want to outdo their deeds, proving that your family can produce more than one 
hero. 

71-78 Your family crossed a wealthy or influential family and have suffered because of it. That family is now your Enemy. 

79-80 Your family follows a religion or philosophy unaccepted by the rest of your community. Possibly they have kept their beliefs 
hidden, or perhaps they simply ignore the sneers and cold looks. Whatever, it marks you as different, and the increasing 
persecution has made your convictions stronger. 

81-82 Your family has a reputation for luck. Everything your family does turns-out splendidly; it has wealth it has never seemed to 
work for; it has a strong reputation; no ill has ever befallen it. You have, however, heard something that makes you suspicious 
of this charmed life you've led. How did you family come by this luck? Was a much higher price — perhaps a darker price — 
paid for it? 

83-84 Your family performed a great service for a wealthy noble or person of influence. As a reward you were taken into that 
person’s service. You gain this powerful patron as an Ally. 

85-86 Your family was ever cruel to you. Why, you do not know, but your siblings always seemed to receive better treatment and 
more favour. You have always been denied. That is why, at the first opportunity, you left them behind, forgetting them and 
secking the life of an adventurer. 

87-88 Your hereditary line is slowly becoming extinct, every year one member of the diminishing family dies in a frightful and 
twisted ‘accident’. What is behind this run of misfortune? Are you family cursed or has some evil agency taken to expunging 
your blood line? Are you next? 

89-90 Your family was involved in some community event that has made them either famous or infamous. The legacy of what they 
did follows you everywhere. What did your family do? Can you shake the reputation? Do you want to? 

91-92 Your family was wealthy once, but is now reduced to poverty. How did it lose its fortune? Was it due to circumstance or the 
actions of others? If others, how did they ruin you — and how will you make them pay? 

93-94 Your family, previously poor and beggared, has ever struggled to survive. Yet when you were a lad somehow your father 
attained great wealth. How did they come by this money? What effect did it have on the family? Will somebody arrive to 
reclaim or perhaps terminate the mysterious fortune? 

95-96 Your family, through financial need, sent you into service with another family of some prestige. As their ward you have learned 
many things about them including a dire secret that, if revealed, would get you killed. What is this hidden truth? What damage 
could it do? Decide with your Games Master. 

97-98 You accidentally killed a close friend or sibling when playing together. The horror of the situation caused you to flee, 
remaining silent about the tragedy. When the adults finally went out to search for the missing adolescent no trace could be 
found, although they searched the area where you left the body. You have lived with the guilt ever since, but whatever became 
of you compatriot? Did they escape death or did something unspeakable happen to the body? 

99-00 You recently experienced a supernatural epiphany which shook you. Whilst out alone a god personally came to speak with 
you, or perhaps a host of spirits manifested and danced about you. The event, whatever it was, may be seen as a blessing by 
the local community or conversely deemed blasphemous. In more secular societies the experience, if reported, could be viewed 
as the onset of insanity. 

20



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
7o determane her Social Class, Anathaym rolls d100 and gets 97. Fortune 

Having determined the character’s culture it is now time to has smuled wpon the heroine since she us descendedfrom the Aristocracy. The 
develop his community ties. Community consists of a number of Games Master decides she s closely related to one of the city’s ruling oligarchs, 
related elements: family, contacts, background events and passions. granting her a privileged position in sociely and allowing her to live in her 
Passions have been mentioned in the Culture section earlier, but you Jamaly’s well appointed home. 
will find the rules for them here. For her starting money Anathaym has 4d6 x75 SP - her roll s 9 which 

Work through each of the Community elements as described gues her 675 SPan total. As a member of the aristocracy her Money Modyfer 
below adding the details to your character sheet. This is an opportu- of 5 increases this to 3,375 SP personal wealth. The Games Master says 
nity to really bring your character to life — to work out what family that Anathaym has 1,000 SP in ready coin, with the remaining 2,575 SP 
he has, what friends and enemies he might have made, what strange being in the form of jewellrey and clothes. 
or odd things may have happened to him in his past, and what things Next Anathaym checks the status of her parents — her 1ol of 67 indicates 
drive his loyalty, his loves and his hates. that only her father remains alive, her mother dying whilst she was a hitle 

gurl. She then rolls 19 on the siblings table and gets a 1 on the 1df4or how 

CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr SocciiaALl CLlAaSsSs many brothers and susters she has. Emma decides her character’s one sibling us 

Social Class measures the prosperity, resources and social posi- a sister by the name of Kara. 

tion of characters. Their class influences the starting money avail- The Games Master thinks it ts wise lo delay the generation of her extended 

able to them, and likely Background Resources — things to which the Jamaly until later. However aroll of 51 on the Family Reputation table shows 

character has access and can return to when not adventuring. It is that whilst Anathaym’s famaly is not promanent, it has no black marks against 

additionally used to determine income between adventures (see the it. A further roll of 77 on the Connections table resulls in one Rival. 
Economics and Equipment chapter). The Games Master decides that Xenos will be Anathaym’s Rwal. They 

Unless it has been predefined as the consequence of a Back- come_from_famailies of a simalar background, and even grew up together. But, 

ground Event or specifically decided by the Games Master, a char- as Xenos has matured he has become something of a debauched wastrel who 

acter’s Social Class is rolled randomly — although it can be chosen constantly mocks Anathaym’s diligence. He also harbours designsf or her sister, 

or re-rolled if the Games Master permits. There are four separate Kara, and Anathaym is determined to protect Kara from this rat. Xenos has 

tables, one for each culture, which determine the class the character broken many hearts, caring nothing for the wreckage he leaves belind. Ana- 

or his family have enjoyed for most of their life. thaym s determined this will not happen to her sister... 

Class defines broad categories of social strata, but may have 
more subdivisions as determined by the game setting. In general 
the more advanced the culture, the more complex its social struc- 
ture. Players should confer with the Games Master to decide what 
precise title or rank is appropriate for their character. 

The Social Class tables start on page 24. 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy 
All characters begin the game with commodities or currency 

worth: 

& Barbarians: 4d6 x50 silver picces 
& Civilised: 4d6 x75 silver pieces 
& Nomadic: 4d6 x25 silver picces 
& Primitive: 4d6 x10 silver picces 

Multiply the character’s starting money by the Money Modi- 
fier to determine the available cash or commodities the character 
has. At the Games Master’s discretion additional money generated 
by the Money Modifier may be in the form of goods or chattels 
rather than ready coin. 

The Background Resources reflect additional items the charac- 
ter either can start the game with — such as a mount (horse, camel 
or beast appropriate to culture) —and things he can call upon, such 
as servants or slaves. 

FaAMmIiLlIiEeSs 
Every character comes from a family. The family might be 

rambling with dozens of members or small and tightknit with only 
a handful of kin. The family’s reputation might help or hinder 

21



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

the character, or its connections might prove useful for all sorts of 
reasons now or in the future. PEerRsSoOnNAaLl COoNnNnEeCcTtIioONnSs 

If desired, roll 1d100 on each of the Family tables below to Why are the characters adventuring together? What connects them and 

determine parental status, the number of siblings the character Jorms the companionship? It is recommended that each player choose at 
least one of his_fellows and, working with the chosen colleague, devise a 

has, and the extended family’s structure. Next determine the fami- 
reason_for the relationship. Some examples: 

ly’s connections and reputation. Does the family enjoy respect in its 
community? Do its connections bring it a level of power or prestige? &K Childhoodf riends who have continued together into adulthood. 
Are there are skeletons in the closet that might threaten stigma or & Members of the same community or culture. 
ostracism? Does reputation bring allies or enemies? & Members of the same profession, o, iffrom different professions, have 

It is recommended to leave the details of large families vague. had chance to meet and do business. 
One way of developing a story for MYTHRAS characters is to intro- « 4 lucky encounter in a tavern, inn or other social establishment. 
duce family members — such as that shrewish aunt or roguish cousin & A shared acquaintance (such as a third character in the group). 
— through roleplaying and scenario development. Keeping details 
vague at this stage gives the Games Master the flexibility for creating Starting characters wishing to form a personal connection as part of 

such introductions. Family tables start on page 25. their background are rewarded with a pool of Luck Points available to 
the entire party, rather than just a single individual. The number of Luck 
Points starts at two and increases by 1 per character who hasformed a per- 

ALlLlIiEeSs,, COoNnTtAaCcTtSs,, sonal connection within the group. This pool of pointsfunctions in a very 
simalar way to the individual Luck Points a character has, but are therefor 

R the benefit if all those within the group. They can only be drawn upon by 
IiVvAaLlSs AanNDd ENnEeMmIiEeSs a character when he is actively helping, or intends to help, another character 
Allies, Contacts, Rivals and Enemies are people, or perhaps (this can be anyone in the group needing help; not just the character with 

organisations, that a character has developed a relationship with for whom a relationship has been established). 
either good or ill. At this stage all one needs to do is give these sup- For example, the players in Steve's game decide that they will all hail 
porting characters a name (Contact: Gundleus the Sage, for exam- Jrom the same city, Meeros, and belong to_families that have known each 
ple, does just fine; or, Enemy: Cult of Yethis); fleshing out the details other for years, the characters growing-up together. There are four players 
can come later. allogether: Emma (playing Anathaym), Kathrine (playing Kara), Fames 

(playing Hallax), and Rob (playing Tor-Irdeen, a minotaur character). 
& Ally: a friend, colleague or relation who shares the same cause 

Clearly Rob's character is unlikely to have grown-up with the humans, 
as the character and will offer help and guidance when called 

0 Steve rules that connections will come later;, through play. But for the 
upon. Depending on their personality the Ally may want a 

humans of Meeros the Group's Luck Points equal 5: two points to start 
favour in return or might provide aid for free. 

with, plus one pointf or each human, and the connections they havef ormed. 
& Contacts: people of potential influence the character knows. 

Steve tells Rob that in the furst session of game play, Tor-Irdeen will be 
A Contact is an acquaintance who can help, not one who will. 

introduced and gwen a chance to form a connection with the humans. 
& Rival: those who oppose the character for the same or similar 

Depending on how successful this plays out, then the Group Luck Points 
goals, and will attempt to interfere with or harass him. 

will increase 1o 6. 
& Enemy: someone who wishes the character harm, and will 

go to lengths to ensure the character suffers in some way. & - 
Enemies may take direct or indirect action, possibly trying 
to influence contacts and allies to bring about the character’s 
misfortune. PAaSsssSiIoOnNSs 

Using Passions in MYTHRAS is optional but their use can greatly 
Allies, Contacts, Rivals and Enemies are intended to act in the 

assist players and Games Masters in deepening the nature of the 
background, providing occasional interactions with the character 

character, introducing plot hooks based on a character’s desire or 
but not always being prominent in their lives. These can be good 

prejudices, and helping the player to understand who his character 
sources of background information and, in certain circumstances, 

is, what drives him, and so on. 
drive crucial parts of a scenario, but they are generally intended 

Passions are measured in the same way as skills; they have a start- 
to be bit-players in the characters’ stories rather than fully-fleshed 

ing value based on two characteristics and are rated between 1 and 
non-player characters. Of course, they may well develop into ful- 

100 (or higher). Passions represent several things: 
ly-formed non-player characters as a campaign develops, and so 
Games Masters should keep careful note of who they are, how they « Loyaltics and allegiances 
look and act, what they know, and how they have (and will) interact & Strongly held beliefs or ideals 
with the character. This will maintain consistency in how they are & Emotion felt towards someone or something 
portrayed. 

A Passion can be improved in the same way as a skill or it can 
be either increased or decreased by the Games Master depending 
on circumstances. Aud, for example, may have Loyalty to Achatus, his clan 
chief, at 70%. However if Aild were to make an alliance with an enemy clan 
that Achaius disapproves of;, then the Games Master could, quite reasonably, have 
Aild’s Loyalty drop to 50%, representing an erosion of his fidelity. Conversely, 

22



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

PAass1ioOnNSs TAaBbLlEe 

Object of Passion Examples Starting Percentage 

Lover, Sibling, Wife, Parent, Aloof or Unsuspecting 
A person, in a romantic or familial context . . 30% plus Loved one’s POW+CHA 
P ’ Object of Desire 

A person in a platonic context (a friendship Leader, Teacher, Ruler, Master, Rescuer, Priest, 30% plus Character’s POW 
or loyalty, for example) Enemy and subject’s CHA 

Enemy leader, Rival worker, Husband of Desired 30% plus Character’s POW 
A person in an averse context 

Lover, Murderer of Friend, Thief and subject’s CHA 

Family, School, Temple, Religion, Local 
An organisation or group of people 30% plus Character’s POW+INT 

Community, Military Unit, Guild, Nobles 

Foreigners, Non Humans, Tigers, Supernatural 
A race or species 30% plus Character’s POW x 2 

Beasts, Ghosts, Primitives 

A Country, Home Town, Holy Place, Capital City, 
A place 30% plus Character’s POW+INT 

Graveyards, Mountains 

The Iron Throne, Diabolic Relic, Magic, Darkness, 
An object or substance 30% plus Character’s POW x 2 

Ancient Heirloom, Gemstones 

An Ethic, Moral Code, Freedom, Personal Honour, 
A concept or ideal 30% plus Character’s POW+INT 

Betrayal, Dishonesty 

Achaius might grant Adld a_favour which increases the Loyalty to 80%, demon- 
strating the strengthening bond. MAaRrRrIiAaGgEe 
A Passion can be for anything — a person, an organisation, an Thus 15 purely optional, but 15 the character married or betrothed to 

ideal, even an object. Passions are typically described by a verb such be married? Marriage s the most common way for_famalies to advance 

as: Comfort, Desire, Despise, Destroy, Espouse, Fear, Flee, Foreswear, Hate, their status, position and power;, and so making marriage arrangements, 
evenfor children who are notyet old enough to be married, s common. To 

Love, Loyally to, Protect, Repudiate, Respect, Seek, Subvert, Torment or Uphold. 

The verb describes the nature of the relationship. Loyalty, for decide Marital Status roll 1d100 for the character and compare it with 

instance, does not always indicate respect; Respect does not always the character’s base value Influence skill. If the result is equal to or less 

indicate love; Despising something is not the same as hating it; Lov- than base value Influence then the character is Betrothed — that is, has been 

ing someone is not the same as being loyal to them. The verb used promased into a marriage. If the 1d100 roll is equal to or less than 10% 

should therefore reflect how the character feels either personally or of the character’s Influence then the character is already married. 

culturally towards the subject. How happy or prosperous this marriage is depends entirely on the 

A Passion can be established at any point in the game — either player and Games Master. Take a litle time to think about the nature of 

during this phase of character creation or, and perhaps most inter- the relationship: is it a political or economic betrothal? Does Social Class 

estingly, during game play. All a character needs to do to establish a play a part? Do the two pariners love each other? Perhaps they hate each 

Passion is stipulate that he intends to form the passion and give it an other. If love or hate are involved then consider establishing a Passwn to 

appropriate adjective: Love (Elissa), for example; or Shun (Sorcery). represent the depth and nature of the relationshp. 

The starting value of the Passion varies according to its type - see And, if the character s marred, have any children formed from the 

the Passions Table, opposite. union? Again this can be an agreed situation between the player and 

All the Starting Percentages may be modified by the Games Games Master. Or the player can roll 1d4-1 to determine the number 

Master to reflect deeper or lesser devotion; thus, Love (Elissa) might of claldren present. If there are claldren, then roll 1d4 to determine the 

begin for a character at 55%, using the above Starting Percentage ages of the chaldren. If the age rolls are wdentical, then the character has 

calculation, but, because the character is so faithful to Elissa (a child- produced twins or even triplets. If the character starts play middle aged 

hood sweetheart), the Games Master decides to increase the Starting or olde; roll the children’s ages on the Age Table (see page 34) as if they 

Percentage to 75%, taking into account the lifelong devotion. were one category younger. 

Where a person or people are concerned, the Passion does not 
need to be reciprocated. It is up to the Games Master to decide - 3 
if it is or not, and the Player must decide if unreciprocated love 
will strengthen his character’s Passion, or weaken it. If the decision 
is made to strengthen the Passion (unrequited love often drives the 
heart to deeper fondness or infatuation), then the Passion value can 
be increased (or decreased, if the depth of feeling is diminished) by 
1d10%. 

This section only details what Passions represent and their default 
values. How Passions are used in the game is discussed in Chapter 6. 

23



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

SocciiaALl CLlAasss TAaBbLlEeSs 
BAaRrBbAaRrIiaAnN SOoCcIiaALl CLlAaSsSs 
14100 Class Example Title Money Mod Background Resources 

. Nothing but the clothes on their back, and maybe some personal 
01-05 Outcast Exile, Outlaw 0.25 

armament 

06-15 Slave Bondsman, Caxtos, Peon, Serf, Thrall 0.5 Resides on owners property; owns a few keepsakes 

Churl, Commoner, Feine, Freedman, Karl, Rented accommodation or farmland; possesses own tools or 
16-80 Freeman 1 . i 

Labourer livestock, simple weapons 

Owns a house, and either a farmstead, business or ship; furniture; 

81-95 Gentry Faldormen, Flaith, Hauldr, Reeve, Thane 3 tools, weapons & armour, mount, several servant or slave retainers; 

support from locals 

i Lo i i As above but lives in a great hall and possessions are of excellent 
96-100 Ruling Chieftain, Cyning, Eorl, Jarl, King 5 

quality; fealty from a country or smaller region 

Ciiviiulisseedp SocciiaALl CLlAaSsSs 
14100 Class Example Title Money Mod Background Resources 

. Nothing but the clothes on their back, and maybe some personal 
01-02 Outcast Beggar, Mendicant, Vagabond, Vagrant 0.25 

armament 

03-20 Slave Chattel, Captive, Helot, Servant 0.5 Resides on owners property; owns a few keepsakes 

. i Rented accommodation or farmland; possesses own tools or 
21-70 Freeman Citizen, Peasant, Proletariat, Tenant, Vassal 1 

livestock; simple weapons 

. . . Owns property, farm or business; furniture, tools, weapons & 
Bailiff, Equite, Master, Official, Steward, . 

71-95 Gentry Wl 3 armour, mount, several servant or slave retainers; support from 
arden 

locals 

Owns several properties, extensive farmlands or multiple 
Archon, Baron, Count, Duke, Lord, Nawab, . i i 

96-99 Aristocracy . . 5 businesses; expensive furniture, tools, weapons & armour, mounts, 
Noble, Oligarch, Patrician, Satrap . . . 

many servants or slaves; fealty from regional inhabitants 

Caliph, Czar, Dictator, Emperor, Imperator, 

100 Rulin; g MaharajYa h, Mogguull,  Pasha, Pharaoh, 10 As above but of p priceless quqaualliittyy;  fealty ty from a dominion or nation 

Potentate, Prince, Rajah, Shah, Sultan, Tyrant 

NoMmAaDd SocciiaALl CLlAassSs 
14100 Class Example Title Money Mod Background Resources 

Nothing but the clothes on their back, maybe some personal 
01-05 Outcast Outlaw, Rebel 0.25 o 

armament, and mount or small boat if suitable 

i i Resides on conquered lands, or in owner’s yurt or vessel, owns a 
06-10 Slave Bool, Convict, Prisoner, Thrall 0.5 i 

few keepsakes, plus tools or simple weapon 

. i Possesses own mounts, cart or small boat; owns yurt or similar, half 
11-90 TFreeman Arad, Haran, Kinsmen, Subjects 1 

a dozen livestock, weapons, simple armour, a slave or two 

. i Owns many mounts, carts or boats; large yurt or similar, several 
i Chieftain, Emir, Khan, Khaqan, Sea Lord, . 

91-100 Ruling . 3 dozen livestock, good weapons, good armour, some slaves, fealty 
el 

from tribe and conquered peoples 

PRrIiMmIiTtIivVEe SOoccCIiaAlL CLlAaSsSs 
14100 Class Example Title Money Mod Background Resources 

01-05 Outcast Outlaw 0.25 A weapon and a few knickknacks 

06-80 Freeman Tribesman 1 Simple home, tools, and primitive weapons 

Large hall; valuable skins, totems, trophies, tools, 

81-100 Ruling Chieftain, Elder 2 cooking implements, decorated primitive weapons, 

simple armour; support from tribe

24 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

Famiirly & COoNnNnEeCcTtIioONnSs TAaBbLlEeSs 
PAaRrEeNnTtSs TAaBbLlEe COoNnNnEeCcTtIioONnSs TAaBbLlEe 

1d100 Parents . Allies, Contacts, Enemies and 
1d100 Connections . 

01-20 Both Parents living Rivals 
91-40 Single Parent — Father 01-20 No connections of note None 

41-60 Onec birth parent plus step—parent Family enjoys reasonable Roll 1d4. On a 1 you gain an 

61-80 Single Parent — Mother 21-80 connections within its Ally; 2 a Contact; 3 an Enemy; 4 

community a Rival 
81-00 Both parents dead 

Family is well connected in the 

SIBLINGS TABLE 81-90 community and‘is known to As above but roll twice 
Siblings Table

those commanding local power 

1d100 Siblings As above, but the family also 

01-10 None 91-95 enjoys some status with those As above but roll thrice 

11-30 1d4 commanding regional power 

31-70 1d6 As above but the family also 

71-90 1d8 96-00 enjoys some status with those As above but roll four times 

91-00 1d10 commanding national power 

EXxTteEnNdDEedD FaAMmIiLlyY TAaBbLlEe 
1d100 Grandparents Aunts & Uncles Cousins 

01-10 None None None 

11-30 1d2-1 1d2 1d3 

31-70 1d3-1 1d3 1d4 

71-90 1d3 1d4 1d6 

91-00 1d3+1 1d6 1d8 

REePpUuTtAaTtIioOnN TAaBbLlEe 

Allies, Contacts, Enemies 
1d100 Reputation 

and Rivals 

01-15 Family has a poor reputation 1d3 Enemies or Rivals 

Family’s reputation is sound, 

but there may be a few skeletons . 
16-35 1 Enemy or Rival 

and secrets better left locked 

away 

36-65 A sound family reputation - 

Family enjoys a good reputation 

although there may be those 
66-85 i . i 1 Contact or Ally 

either inside or outside the 

family who could tarnish it 

Family’s reputation is 

86-00 untarnished and of excellent 1d3 Contacts or Allies 

standing 

25



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

BAassic CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr CRrEeAaTtIioOnN ELleEmMEeNnTtSs 

1 2
CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCcSs 'AAcCtTiIoOnN POoIiNnTtSs 3
3d6 for S. TR, C\ ON, DEX, POW;  and C«H A. 29 d6+6 for INT+ DEX Action Points o M 

INT and SIZ. Allocate results to fit the concept. Results may DAamMAaGgEe  MoIVdIOiDfIFiIeErR 
2 

be allocated in the order listed, or distributed as the Games 12 or Less 1 B 

Ma1zs ter Eand PhEyers fE xgr‘ee . ‘ 13-24 2 STR + SIZ Modifier 

Alternatively distribute 80 points amongst the charac- 25-36 3 
5 _ 

teristics. Minimum 3 (8 for INT and SIZ), maximum 18. . . 5 or Less 1D8 
. ’ Tor every additional 12 points +1 

Use all the points. 6-10 -1D6 

11-15 -1D4 

ONARACTERISTICS ATTRIBUTES 16-20 —1D2 
Origiaal  Max.  Curent Origisal. Carren 21-95 +0 

26-30 +1D2 

[ _Consmunos @) [l @) Damace ¢ Mo Moviries 9 3135 1D4 
[ ON@, EPERENGEMTDIRR 36-40 +1D6 

VRGO RATE Maaggiic PoIiNnTts = 
POW characteristic 

InmaTive 

Luck Poms 4
Movesment 

tive effects): 

EXxPpEeRrIieEnNcCEe MOoDIdFifIiEeRr 

8 Lacation Points 

Exp. 
Heal 

CHA Modifier 
InNIitTiIaAtTIivVeE BoONnUuSs = e pow [ O] wok Lol Arm 

Average of INT & DEX wWra [ 6 or Less ! 
BEX + CHA ] — Risht Arm 7-12 0 
INT ol [ | 
st [ O T 13-18 +1 
W 
ws 00 » Each 6 points +1 

INT « X | - L. 

46 Lett Lot 

1 Right Leg @ 

5
HEeAaLlIinNgG RAaTtEe 

11 . CON Healing Rate 

6 or Less 1 

SKkIiLlLlSs & COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 6 7-12 9 

These are calculated using the characteristics listed for each skill. 

At this stage you generate only the beginning values; skills will increase 15-18 

as you progress through Cultures and Community, and Careers and MOVEMENT = Each 6 points +1 
Movement = 

Development. 6m for Humans 

10 7
Hi1tT POoIiNnTtSs PEerR LoOCcAaTtIioOnN                                               CONN++SSIIZ @ 

Location 1-5  6-10 11-15 16-20 21-25 26-30  31-35 3640 LLuucckk  PPooiinnttss 
Head | 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Euck 

POW Points 
Chest 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 

6 or Less 1 
Abdomen 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

7-12 2 
Fach Arm 1 1 2 3 4 5) 6 7 

13-18 
Each Leg 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

Each 6 points +1 

Hit Points appear on the second page of the character sheet and are shown here for clarity. 

26



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtUuRrEe & COoMmMmUuNnIiTtYy 

CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr CRrEeAaTtIioOnN SuUmMMmAaRrYy 
11 CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr COoNnCcEePpTt 

& Decide on the kind of character to play. Keep it simple for now. More will come. 

2 CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCcSs 

& If playing a human, 3d6 for STR, CON, DEX, POW and CHA. 2d6+6 for INT and SIZ. Allocate results to fit the concept. 
& Alternatively distribute 80 points amongst the characteristics. Minimum 3 (6 for INT and SIZ), maximum 18. Use all the 

points. 

33 CCaAlLcCuUlLaATtEe ATtTtRrIiBbUuTtEeSs 
& Use the characteristics to determine Action Points, Damage Modifier, Experience Modifier, Healing Rate, Hit Points, Luck 

Points, Movement and Initiative Bonus as described in pages 8 to 10. 

44 S StaTAnNdDaArRdD S5KkIiLlLlSs 
& Calculate Standard Skills by adding together the appropriate characteristics. 

55 Curlture 

& Decide on a Cultural Background: Barbarian, Civlised, Nomadic or Primitive. Allocate 100 points amongst the listed Stan- 
dard Skills, the chosen Professional Skills and the Combat Style for the chosen culture. Skills must have a minimum of 5% 

and cannot receive more than 15%. Customs and Native Tongue gain +40% each. 
& Decide on Cultural Passions: Loyalty, Love and Hate. 
& Calculate your character's Starting Money. 

66 BaAcCkKgGrRoOuUnNdD 

& Roll or choose a Background Event from pages 18 to 20. 
& Roll for Social Class (or choose according to the campaign), for Parents, Family Standing, Connections. 

77 CAaRrEeEeRr 

& Choose a Career from those available to your character's culture. 
& Distribute 100 points amongst the career’s listed Standard Skills and whatever Professional Skills were chosen, Not all of the 

available skills need to be improved, but no individual skill can receive more than 15%. 
& Identify if the career uses magic and consult the appropriate Magic chapter for information on spells and so forth. 
& Consider Cult or Brotherhood membership as described in the Cults and Brotherhoods chapter starting on page 192. 

8&8 Bonuss SkiiLlLl Poiints 
& Depends on age, but default characters have 150 points, with a limit of assigning no more than 15 points per skill. Choose 

one additional Professional skill as a hobby speciality. 

9O EqQuiipPmMEenNTt 
& Determine Starting Equipment based on Social Class. 
& Buy any additional equipment needed using the Starting Money determined as part of culture and social class. Refer to the 

Economics and Equipment chapter starting on page 54. 

10 FinNAaLLlYly.... 
& Don't forgge t to gIveg ive yy our character a name. Look to establish Connections with other characters. 

27



Mythras:  Careers

— 
= i X o2 M oK &oWOx i S (LK SO QR < A o IRV | = < gl 

Careers

pa— — 
= i X o2 M oK &oWOx j< 

Yy m KW S " &K K F R 
=] | IR o W 

his chapter develops the character’s skills through a profes- &K Select up to three skills from the Professional Skills available to that 
sion, possible cult membership, the allocation of Bonus Skill career. 

T Points, and some starting equipment, and determining what & Distribute 100 points amongst the career’s listed Standard Skills and 
magic the character might (or might not) possess. whatever Professional Skills were chosen, increasing each skill by 1% for 

every point spent on improving it. Not all of the available skills need to be 
improved, but no individual skill can recete more than 15%. 

CAaRrEeEeRrSs Newly chosen Combat Styles and Professional Skills start off at 

Every MYTHRAS character starts the game having been trained in their base characteristic value. Choosing a Style or Professional Skill 

a career. The occupation he chooses may not necessarily be the one previously gained via cultural background simply allows the char- 

he continues to follow as he begins his adventuring life, but it is the acter to further apply some of their career skill points at this stage. 

career he embarked on as part of the transition to adulthood, and it Some of these skills such as Craft, Language or Lore offer choice of 

further defines his skill development. a specialisation. In these cases the speciality selected should be one 

The careers available to a character are dependent on their which suits the character’s culture. 

cultural background; in some cultures the range of available occu- 
pations is quite narrow because the needs of the community are ExAaMmPpLlEe CAaRrEeEeRrSs bByY CUuLlTtuURrAaLl BAacCkKgGrRoOuUnNDd 

simple; or social traditions will push young adults along a certain 
Civilised Barbarian Nomad Primitive 

path. In others, the list is more diverse, reflecting a more complex 
Agent Beast Handler Beast Handler Beast Handler 

community with wider needs that have diversified over the centuries. 
Alchemist Crafter Crafter Crafter 

Players are nominally free to choose which career they wish their Beast Handler Entertainer Fisher Fisher 

character to learn, provided the Games Master deems it suitable. Courtesan Farmer Herder Hunter 

The following table gives some guidance as to the common types Courtier Fisher Hunter Physician 

of vocation available to each cultural type. It is not definitive and Crafter Herder Merchant Sailor 

Entertainer Hunter Official Scholar 
may differ significantly in more exotic game settings. For example a 

Farmer Merchant Physician Scout 
campaign based in a land where magicians are slain at birth could 

Fisher Miner Priest Shaman 
prohibit the selection of magic using professions. Herder Mystic Sailor Thief 

Similar to cultural backgrounds, each career offers the chance Hunter Official Scholar Warrior 

to improve a range of Standard and Professional Skills commonly Merchant Physician Scout 

utilised by that occupation. Some grant access to Magical Skills or Miner Priest Shaman 

extra Combat Styles. Unlike cultural backgrounds, characters need Mystic Sailor Thief 

Official Scholar Warrior 
not invest their points in every available skill, but may tailor which 

Physician Scout 
ones are taken as those fitting for their specific role or culture. 

Priest Shaman 
Characters develop their career skills in the following way: Sailor Thief 

Scholar Warrior 

Scout 

Shaman 

Sorcerer 

Thief 

Warrior 

28

Iv] 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

AGgEeNnTt ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Coming from a civilised city-state Anathaym has a wide selection of 

Agitator, Assassin, Detective, Informer, Spy... 
careers she could potentially follow. Indulged by her father she requests train- 

The work of an agent is to report upon, and operate covertly 
ing as a soldier;, the career he himself followed before retiring to a lfe of 

against those his employer wishes to keep an eye on. They watch, 
politics. Believing lus daughter will soon tire of the gruelling discipline, her 

discover, and act secretively. Anyone might be an agent — servants, 
Jather tolerantly agrees to apprentice her under the twition of weapon-master 

beggars, noblemen, even children. Likewise those that employ 
Lamotus, a_famous warrior: 

agents might be anybody from a jilted lover or struggling merchant 
To her father’s growing alarm, Anathaym flourishes under the guidance 

to the ruler of a nation. Agents mostly deal with passing of informa- 
of the aging master. From the Warrior career she selects the_following three 

tion or minor acts of sabotage, although a few sometimes perform 
professional skills: Lore — Mulitary History 28% (IN'T x2), Lore — Strategy 

assassination if the cause, or payment, is right. 
and Tactics 28% (INT x2), and Survwal 20% (CON+POW). 

SKkIiLlLlSs She then spends her 100 points, dividing it amongst the available career 
sklls thusly: Athletics +10, Endurance +10, Evade +10, Lore — Military 

& Standard Skills: Conceal, Deceit, Evade, Insight, Perception, History +10, Lore — Strategy and Tactics +10, Survwal +10, Unarmed 
Stealth; Combat Style (Concealable Weapons Style) +10, Combat Style (Meerish Slinger) +15, Combat Style (Meerish Infan- 

& Professional Skills: Culture (any), Disguise, Language (any), iry) +15 
Sleight, Streetwise, Survival, Track Her new Meerish Infantry combat style covers training in speay; hoplite 

shueld and javelin — something her tutor feels she’ll need to be proficient in if 
she wishes to join the ranks of the Meeros Scarlet Spears, the regiment her 

ALlCcHhEeMmIiSsTt Jather once commanded. 
Apothecary, Herbalist, Poisoner, Perfumer... Afier applying her career modifiers Anathaym’s skills are now: Athlet- 
Alchemists concern themselves with creating, or trading in, a s 37%, Boating 24%, Brawn 21%, Conceal 23%, Customs 68%, 

wide range of chemical and herbal substances which are used by the Dance 25%, Deceit 28%, Driwve 28%, Endurance 36%, Evade 42%, 
local community. These concoctions can vary in purpose — soaps, First Awd 30%, Influence 28%, Insigh3t1 %, Locale 33 %, Native Tongue 
polishes, dyes, disinfectants, acids, oils, unguents, perfumes, narcot- 63 %, Perception 21 %, Ride 23 %, Sing 16%, Stealth 30 %o, Swim 24 %, 
ics, medicines, poisons — the list is almost endless. The larger the Unarmed 27 %, Willpower 24 %o; Courtesy 38%, Lore (Geography) 38%, 
society they reside in, the more likely that the alchemist will special- Lore — Military Hustory 58%, Lore — Strategy and Tactics 38 %, Streetwise 
ise in making or selling one specific type of compound. 31%, and Survwal 30%; Combat Style (Meerish Slinger) 52 %o, Combat 

Style (Meerish Infantry) 42 %. 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

& Standard Skills: Customs, Endurance, First Aid, Insight, 
Locale, Perception, Willpower COoUuRrTtEeSsaAnN 

& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (Alchemy), Healing, Concubine, Escort, Harem-girl, Houri, Paramour... 

Language (any), Literacy, Lore (Specific Alchemical Special- Professional companions, courtesans make their living through 

ity!), Streetwise providing company, conversation, dance, singing, and sometimes 
other services to those who can afford it. The attitude towards cour- 
tesans can vary dramatically according to their culture, some are 

BeeEaAstT HAaNnDdLlEeRr little more than tavern girls only there to draw in customers, whilst 

Animal Breeder, Beast Tamer, Menagerie Keeper-... others are revered by the high ranking wealthy. The most famous 

Beast handlers make their living by capturing, trading, breeding, and skilled courtesans may literally have princes begging at their 

caring for, or domesticating creatures for a variety of different roles feet. Courtesans can be both male and female. 

in the community. Examples include horse-whisperers, falconers, 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

hound masters, snake wranglers, and the like. Some raise ostensibly 
wild animals for domesticated use, whilst others tend the beasts on & Standard Skills: Customs, Dance, Deceit, Influence, Insight, 
display in private menageries. A few even take captured beasts and Perception, Sing 
turn them into guardians, battlefield weapons, or competitors for pit & Professional Skills: Art (any), Courtesy, Culture (any), Gam- 
fights and gladiatorial events. bling, Language (any), Musicianship, Seduction 

SKkIiLlLlSs 

« Standard Skills: Drive, Endurance, First Aid, Influence, COoUuRrTtIiEerR 
Locale, Ride, Willpower Advisor, Conspirator, Delegate, Diplomat, Sycophant... 

& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (Animal Husbandry), Traditionally members of the gentility or nobility, courtiers are 

Healing (Specific Species), Lore (Specific Species), Survival, those summoned into the service of a ruler or government to act as 

Teach (Specific Species), Track an adviser, a companion, an aide or simply as a lackey. Chosen for 
their ability to be persuasive, insightful or discreet, they are often 
the power-brokers behind domestic and foreign policy. Some court- 
iers are in fact ambassadorial representatives from another, foreign 
nation. Courtiers see and hear much about the affairs of state, and 

1 Such as Acids, Narcotics, Poisons, etc. 

29



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

concerts or provide background music. Poets recite great works of 
CAaRrEeEeRrSs AanNDd SoccCIiaALl CLlAaSsSs literature, and lyric poetry, whereas singers perform choral works, 

MrrHRras does not impose any immediate restrictions on what careers often as choirs. Story-tellers recount apocryphal tales, and so on. 
are available to what social class but it s something players and Games Entertainers sometimes learn several complimentary arts to increase 
Masters may wish to consider. Some social classes will look down on their repertoire and create unique acts. For instance, a bard might 
members who practice certain vocations, risking censure or perhaps even combine the arts of music, singing and poetry. 
expulsion_from their rank. One culture maightforbid nobles becoming mer- 
chants due to the risk of financial corruption, whilst another may restrict SKkIiLlLlSs 
the practice to only those who are part of the nobility, creating an enclave 
of merchant princes. « Standard Skills: Athletics, Brawn, Dance, Deceit, Influence, 

Games Masters should decide tf a career is denied to a particular Insight, Sing 

soctal class, but some interesting roleplaying possibilities can present them- & Professional Skills: Acrobatics, Acting, Oratory, Musician- 

selves if a character decides to ignore social norms, and enter a vocation ship, Seduction, Sleight, Streetwise 

usually treated with disdain. How will that character be viewed: pioneer 
or social pariak? What are the consequences? How will the profession 
accept lum? These are all golden opportunities for roleplaying and plot FaArRmMEeRr 

Nd evelopment. 
Gardener, Estate Ouwner, Forager, Harvester, 

Ploughman... 
Farmers cultivate the land, raising or harvesting crops, but they 

may learn a great deal about politics and scandal in high places. are often generalists in a range of skills necessary for foraging or 

Whatever their political standing, the machinations of courtiers can maintaining their chattels. Usually their produce is food and other 

save or undermine a nation. useful flora, such as medicinal herbs or plants which produce fibres 
for clothing. Not all agriculturalists necessarily tend a farm or plan- 

SKkIiLlLlSs tation. Some wander through wild regions harvesting the naturally 
occurring vegetation, whilst others are employed to supervise formal 

& Standard Skills: Customs, Dance, Deceit, Influence, Insight, gardens for rich patrons. Likewise not all farmers are necessarily 
Locale, Perception yokels tied to a small pasture, orchard or vineyard. Many cultures 

& Professional Skills: Art (any), Bureaucracy, Courtesy, Culture may place high status on owners of large estates who manage the 
(any), Language (any), Lore (any), Oratory running of their property. 

SKkIiLlLlSs 
CRrAaFfTtEerR 

Artificer, Artisan... « Standard Skills: Athletics, Brawn, Drive, Endurance, Locale, 

Skilled artisans, professional craftsmen cover a huge range of Perception, Ride 

trades: from basket making through to weaving. Most craftsmen spe- & Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (any), Lore (Agricul- 

cialise in one particular area, but it is not uncommon to find those ture), Lore (Animal Husbandry), Navigation, Survival, Track 

skilled in a second field related to their primary craft. Some crafters 
have associated experience in buying materials and selling their own 
wares, depending on their scale of their business. Primitive crafters FIisShHeErR 
may simply be individuals who produce objects for their family or Beach Comber, Net Tender, Pearl Diver, Whaler... 

tribe. Civilised crafters on the other hand might be part of a fam- Fishermen work the waters, braving the elements and dangers 

ily enterprise or members of an official guild. Some crafts may be to bring back its bounty. Mostly they trawl for edible food, any- 

unavailable or illogical for particular cultures, such as a smith for thing from shellfish to whales. A few seek commodities other than 

primitives. food however, particularly valuable items like rare shells, pearls or 
even medicinal types of water plants. The social rank of fishermen 

SKkIiLlLlSs depends on the value of what they recover; a primitive island based 
culture for example, might grant high status to those who bring back 

& Standard Skills: Brawn, Drive, Influence, Insight, Locale, Per- the greatest amount or most dangerous produce. Fishermen do not 
ception, Willpower necessarily need boats, and neither are they tied to the sea. Many 

& Professional Skills: Art (any), Commerce, Craft (Primary), live beside lakes or along rivers, using nets, baskets, and weirs to trap 
Craft (Secondary), Engineering, Mechanisms, Streetwise their catch. 

SKkIiLlLlSs 
ENnTtEeRrTtAaIinNEerR 

Acrobat, Bard, Dancer, Player, Poet... & Standard Skills: Athletics, Boating, Endurance, Locale, Per- 

Professional entertainers, have a range of skills in which they ception, Stealth, Swim 

can specialise. Acrobats perform feats of balance, gymnastics, and & Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (Any), Lore (Primary 

hand-eye co-ordination. Actors present plays or ribald pantomimes. Catch?), Lore (Secondary Catch?), Navigation, Seamanship, 

Dancers entertain with diverse dances ranging from the erotic to Survival 

ceremonial. Musicians use their instruments to perform private 2 These represent different techniques off ishing, such as whaling, lobster potting, trawling, and so 

on. 

30



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

HEeRrDdEeRr SKkIiLlLlSs 

Breeder, Herdsman, Sacred Goose Tender, Wrangler... & Standard Skills: Boating, Drive, Deceit, Insight, Influence, 
Herders are those who raise and tend flocks of creatures, not Locale, Ride 

necessarily domesticated animals; anything from goats to migrating & Professional Skills: Commerce, Courtesy, Culture (any), Lan- 
mammoths. Most herdsmen spend days or even weeks out on the guage (any), Navigation, Seamanship, Streetwise 
plains or hills, ensuring their beasts have sufficient food and water, 
whilst also watching for predators. A herder does not necessarily 
raise his own livestock; some hire themselves out to escort herds MIiNnEeRr 
over large distances to far off markets or use their skills to purchase Prospector, Quarryman, Sapper, Well Digger... 
stock for less discerning customers. It can be a solitary profession, Miners are those who excavate the ground, for a number of rea- 
but herdsmen generally know the land, the seasons, and the habits sons. Some dig for ore and precious metals, a few seek out special 
of their animals. types of stone for building or statuary, whilst others dig to create 

catacombs or sewers, or to penctrate the defences of towns. What- 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

ever the purpose, miners are prepared to go deep into the ground, 

& Standard Skills: Endurance, First Aid, Insight, Locale, Per- risking life and limb. As a result, miners tend to be both physically 

ception, Ride; Combat Style (Specific Herding or Cultural and mentally strong; used to working in hot, cramped conditions for 

Style) hours on end. 

& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (Animal Husbandry), 
Healing (Specific Species), Navigation, Musicianship, Sur- SKkIiLlLlSs 

vival, Track « Standard Skills: Athletics, Brawn, Endurance, Locale, Per- 
ception, Sing, Willpower 

& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (Mining), Engineering, 
HUuNnTtEeRr Lore (Minerals), Mechanisms, Navigation (Underground), 

Forester, Poacher, Scavenger, Stalker, Trapper... Survival 
Responsible for finding, tracking, and killing creatures, the 

hunter, like the herder, is knowledgeable about the land and the 
behaviour of animals. A hunter may hunt in a variety of ways: sim- MyyssTtIiCc 
ple stalking, trap laying or driving creatures into pens. The purpose Guru, Hermit, llluminate, Master... 
of the hunt depends on the culture of the hunter. Most seek out Mystics are those who seek mastery of the world by the attain- 
prey for the simple purpose of gathering food, but some hunters ment of perfection, spiritual insight or by becoming inured to physi- 
specialise in the extermination of deadly predators or the culling cal discomfort. Depending on the culture from which they originate, 
of animals for valuable body parts: furs, horns or teeth for instance. mystics may be found as anything from reclusive mountaintop her- 
Hunters often learn a supplemental craft for preserving or skinning mits to respected teachers of martial or artistic schools. The path 
the creatures they kill. of their development is always via mastery of self, and most are 

sagacious as an result of their studies. 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

« Standard Skills: Athletics, Endurance, Locale, Perception, SKkIiLlLlSs 

Ride, Stealth; Combat Style (Specific Hunting or Cultural « Standard Skills: Athletics, Endurance, Evade, Insight, Percep- 
Style) tion, Willpower; Combat Style (Cultural Style) 

& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (Hunting Related), Lore & Professional Skills: Art (any), Folk Magic, Literacy, Lore (any), 
(Regional or Specific Species), Mechanisms, Navigation, Sur- Meditation, Musicianship, Mysticism 
vival, Track 

OFfFfIiCcIiaALl 
MEeRrCcHhAaNnTt Minister, Overseer, Steward, Tax Collector... 

Broker, Hawker, Money Lender, Smuggler, Trader... Officials are those appointed or elected to an office, charged with 
Merchants come in many forms: the street vendor, small shop- performing certain administrative duties and granted a degree of 

keeper, wily caravanserai, intrepid merchant-venturer, and many authority to ensure their commands are followed. Examples include 
more. Although their methods or merchandise are different, all have slave managers of large estates, guild masters, bureaucratic scribes, 
one thing in common: to trade commodities (be it goods, food, live- legal advocates or tax collectors. Depending on the size and com- 
stock, people, property or even money) for the highest profit. Mer- plexity of the organisation or government, most officials control a 
chants know a bargain, and how to drive a good one; and not all body of men to help perform their duties. 
trade in legal merchandise. Due to their dealings as middle men, 
many merchants pick up some knowledge of foreign cultures and 
languages. 

31



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

SKkIiLlLlSs SKkIiLlLlSs 

« Standard Skills: Customs, Deceit, Influence, Insight, Locale, & Standard Skills: Athletics, Boating, Brawn, Endurance, 
Perception, Willpower Locale, Swim; Combat Style (Specific Shipboard or Cultural 

& Professional Skills: Burcaucracy, Commerce, Courtesy, Lan- Style) 
guage (any), Literacy, Lore (any), Oratory & Professional Skills: Craft (Specific Shiphoard Speciality?), 

Cuulture (any), Language (any), Lore (any), Navigate, Seaman- 
ship, Survival 

PHhYySsIicCIiaAnN 
Doctor, Healer, Medicine Man, Torturer, Vivisectionist... 
Physicians have detailed knowledge of how the body works, ScChHOoLlAaRr 

although they do not necessarily use that learning to heal. Some Annalist, Librarian, Philosopher, Skald, Scribe... 
instead offer their skills to extract information by coercion, or fur- The keepers and seckers of knowledge and learning, scholars 
ther the depth of their education by questionable practices. A phy- and scribes are people who are fascinated by knowledge and the 
sician can take many guises, some examples being the medicine powers contained within it. Scholars are not necessarily confined 
man of a tribe with his totems and fetishes; a local hermit or wise to dusty libraries or suffocating scriptoriums; they may be active 
woman with their knowledge of herbs and poultices; or a court phy- explorers and archivists, intent on advancing their learning or col- 
sician who can cure fevers and agues with complex chemical reme- lections of tomes. Neither are they dependent on literacy to learn; 
dies. Depending on the sophistication of the culture, many doctors some scholars memorise and hand down their knowledge orally. 
embellish their treatments with ceremonial theatrics, bogus medica- Some scholars are specialists in particular areas of knowledge, such 
tions, and manipulative psychology. as a lawspeaker who is employed to memorise and quote legal codes 

during law cases. 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

SKkIiLlLlSs 
« Standard Skills: Dance, First Aid, Influence, Insight, Locale, 

Sing, Willpower « Standard Skills; Customs, Influence, Insight, Locale, Native 
& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (Specific Physiological Tongue, Perception, Willpower 

Speciality®), Healing, Language (any), Literacy, Lore (Specific & Professional Skills: Culture (any), Language (any), Literacy, 
Alchemical Speciality?), Streetwise Lore (Primary), Lore (Secondary), Oratory, Teach 

PRrIiEeSstT Scouurt 
Arbiter, Cultist, Druid, Mendicant, Prophet... Bounty Hunter, Explorer, Pioneer, Ranger, Wayfarer... 
Priests can take a variety of different roles in society; an official Scouts are those who thrive beyond the reach of their native 

leading worship of the gods, an illuminated seer leading followers civilisation. They may be pioneers seeking out new territory or 
on an exodus to find their god, an administrator in a theocracy, and rangers employed by the military to keep an eye on the borders. 
so on. Priests do not necessarily need to be religious or even believe Some are employed to seek out natural commodities which they sell 
in the faith they serve, whilst others might be granted miracles from to merchants of more settled lands, whilst others are hired to hunt 
their deity to reward suitable propitiation. down fugitives. A few are scholarly explorers, high ranked men seek- 

ing to document new cultures or simply folks cursed with chronic 
SKkIiLlLlSs wanderlust. Hardened by their life, scouts often live from what the 

land provides, understanding the plants, animals and seasons of the 
& Standard Skills: Customs, Dance, Deceit, Influence, Insight, 

wilderness they inhabit. 
Locale, Willpower 

& Professional Skills: Bureaucracy, Devotion (Pantheon, Cult or 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

God), Exhort, Folk Magic, Literacy, Lore (any), Oratory 
& Standard Skills: Athletics, Endurance, First Aid, Perception, 

Stealth, Swim; Combat Style (Specific Hunting or Cultural 
SaAIilLoOrR Style) 

Captain, Galley Slave, Marine, Pirate, Raft man... & Professional Skills: Culture (any), Healing, Language (any), 
Sailors and boatmen have a myriad of roles upon the lakes, riv- Lore (any), Navigation, Survival, Track 

ers, and seas, from the simple crew of a trading ship to hardened 
convict rowers. Those sailors employed as professional raiders or 
marines are often given shipboard combat training. Wise to the ways ShHaAmMAaNn 
of the waves, but superstitious with it, sailors are used to long dan- Animist, Diabolist, Exorcist, Madman, Witch Doctor... 
gerous travels, and the hardships that go with it. The medicine-man, the witch-doctor, the wise-woman: all can 

commune with the spirits and the ancestors; understanding the 

3 Prosthetics, Scrimshaw, Torture, Vivisection, etc. secrets of the spirit plane which lies over, under, and around the 

4 Such as Herbs, Medicines, Poisons etc. 5 Carpentry, Sail Making, Rope Making, etc. 

32



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

world we live in. The shaman has great insight and power, or so they 
would have you believe. Not all have magical powers, some merely CRrEeAaTtIinNgG Aa CustToOmM CAaRrEeEeRr 
follow the rituals and traditions handed down to them. Others are Players can create custom careers subject to the following guidelines: 

outright charlatans using trickery to fool the gullible members of & Agree the career with your Games Master. Your concept of 
their community. Despite the primitive associations, many civilised Death Knight Assassin’ might not fit with the themes and 
cultures also believe in the powers of the spirit world, propitiating style of the MrTHRAS game. 
dead ancestors for instance. & Standard Skills: Choose up to sewen Standard Skills and 

seven Professwnal Skills for the professwon, reflecting s 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

nature. Remember that magical abilities are considered Pro- 

« Standard Skills: Customs, Dance, Deceit, Influence, Insight, Jesswonal Skills. 
Locale, Willpower &K Also remember that Combat Styles are treated as Standard 

& Professional Skills: Binding (Ciult, Totem or Tradition), Folk Skalls. Try to avoid granting Combat Styles except to those 

Magic, Healing, Lore (any), Oratory, Sleight, Trance careers where physical conflict us a regular occurrence orfun- 
damental to surviwal. 

N P 
SoORrCcEeRrEerR 

Enchantress, Magi, Warlock, Witch, Wizard... 
The dedicated practitioners of sorcery who seek to control the WAaRrRrIioORr 

world around them through spells, incantations and rituals that are Bodyguard, Champion, Mercenary, Pit Fighter, Soldier... 

not necessarily tied to any gods or spirits, but directly alter the fab- Professional soldiers are the warrior class of a community; this is 

ric of reality. A sorcerer is often fascinated by all aspects of magic, the career of the fighting man. Most of their time is spent patrolling, 

driven to master its subtleties, and discover lost incantations. Some guarding and training — focusing on the use of weapons, close-quar- 

gain their power from a lifetime of studying dusty tomes, whereas ter tactics, and the study of enemy styles to make the most of any 

others might offer sacrifices to learn from the diabolic entities of for- future opportunities. The warrior may or may not follow a partic- 

bidden realms. A few are deceivers with no supernatural powers at ular martial code, and similarly he might focus on finesse or simple 

all, using legerdemain and prestidigitation to fool others into paying brute-force. 

them respect. 
SKkIiLlLlSs 

SKkIiLlLlSs & Standard Skills: Athletics, Brawn, Endurance, Evade, 

& Standard Skills: Customs, Deceit, Influence, Insight, Locale, Unarmed; Combat Style (Cultural Style®), Combat Style 

Perception, Willpower (Speciality Style’) 

& Professional Skills: Folk Magic, Invocation (Cult, School or & Professional Skills: Ciraft (any), Engineering, Gambling, Lore 

Grimoire), Language (any), Literacy, Lore (any), Shaping, (Military History), Lore (Strategy and Tactics), Oratory, 

Sleight Survival 

THhIiEeFf 
Burglar, Conman, Fence, Mugger, Tomb Robber... AGgEe 
Thieves are those who delight in stealing, or are forced to steal How old is your character? An Adventurer may start as young 

from others to support themselves. They range from petty criminals or old as the player desires, subject to the agreement of the Games 
who mug or pickpocket folk on the streets, to gang leaders and gold- Master. It is recommended that beginning characters start as youths 
en-tongued swindlers. Whilst thieves thrive in urban environments or young adults, but much depends on the setting, and whether 
they also exist in less civilised cultures too, operating as outlawed the game will be but a short one-off adventure or a long running 
brigands, and raiders of neighbouring tribes. Some thieves specialise campaign. 
in tomb robbing, stealing the grave goods of the dead. A few inde- A table is provided, breaking age into Age Categories. Note that 
pendently wealthy cutpurses and burglars are simply bored individ- this table can be used for non-human characters by simply substi- 
uals who thieve for adventurous excitement. tuting the actual number of years for longer or shorter lived races. 

A character’s age has a direct effect on their skill competence; as 
SKkIiLlLlSs older characters naturally have more life experience than younger 

compatriots. 
« Standard Skills: Athletics, Deceit, Evade, Insight, Perception, 

Stealth; Combat Style (Concealable Weapons Style) 
& Professional Skills: Acting, Commerce, Disguise, Lockpicking, 

Mechanisms, Sleight, Streetwise 
6 This is the warrior’s default starting g cultural style. 

7 Speciality styles are those catering to particular troop types, martal school or career (see Combat 

Styles on page 86 in the Combat chapter). 

33



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

To determine how old a character is, a player may either choose 
an age within the Age Category permitted, or simply roll the value STtaARrTtIinNgG EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 
randomly. Every character begins with some starting money and starting 

equipment, determined by their culture and social class. In addition 
they may augment their belongings by buying additional items (or 

AGgEe TAaBbLlEe upgrading ones they already have) from the Equipment section of 
this book. 

Bonus Maximum 
Age . . Background The table on page 35 gives some examples of personal posses- 

Age Skill Skill 
Category . Event Rolls 

Points Increase sions available to a character of that social class. These are merely 
guidelines, and are open to change according to the campaign or 

Young 1d6+10 100 +10 0 
setting. 

Adult 2d6+15 150 2FilH 1 

Middle Aged 3d6+25 200 +20 2 
ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 

Senior* 4d6+40 250 +25 3 
As a member of the aristocracy Anathaym begins the game with the 

Oo1d* 5d6+60 300 +30 4 
Jollowing: 

Four sets of good quality clothing: a court dress, day, and evening wear 
and a_formal gown. Mostly though, she opts for a simple, but well-made, 

AGgEe TAaBbLlEe NOoTtEeSs tunic akin to the kind worn by Meerish soldiers. 
Bonus Skill Points determines how many additional skill points the Four weapons, chosen_from her father’s armoury: a shorisword, dagger; 

character has to spend on developing hus skills — see thefollowing section. spear; and shield. Her sling she makes herself from a length of strong leather: 

Maximum Skill Increase limils how many of the Bonus Poinls can A st of Meerish Hoplite armour - again chosen from her father’s 
armoury. Although the protective value is determined by 1d3+3 roll, the 

be applied to any one particular skill. 
Games Master declares that Anathaym s given a mixture of leather and 

Background Event Rolls are used for characters starting at different 
bronze with appropriate Armour Point values. 

ages, requiring the player to potentially roll additional times on the Background She also has a horse, chosenfrom thefamily stables. Anathaym’s mount is 
Event Table in the Culture and Commumnily chapter. a chestnut gelding named Arrow, for lis speed and sharp temper. 

*Ageing: If a character is Senwr or older he is subject to Ageing; see the 

rules for Ageing on page 70. 

CLloOTtHhIinNgG 
Finery and decorations are dependent on the culture and its 

BoNnuss SxkiilLlL POoIiNnTtSs climate. The higher the class the more exclusive the fabric used 

At this stage every character gains an additional pool of ‘free’ in its manufacture. An example would be rough spun wool for the 

skill points based on age, which can be distributed amongst his exist- poor, followed by linens, brocades, and silks as social class or wealth 

ing skills. These are provided so that the character can be rounded increases. In a land full of silk worms and no sheep, these relative 

out, and given particular interests or areas of expertise. The default values may be reversed. Decorations are also culturally dependent. 

for adult characters is a pool of 150 points, with a limit of assigning Teathers may be the height of décor for a primitive tribe, whilst 

no more than 15 points per skill. If characters are younger or older, embroidery using gold threads may be de riguer for a barbarian 

then the number of Skill Points and restrictions will differ, as previ- king. Example decorations are fabrics of bright or rare colours, 

ously indicated on the Age Table. the attachment of precious substances, pelts or fur trims, detailed 

The number of Bonus Skill Points does not necessarily need to embroidery and pattern woven fabrics. 

be tied to age. If the characters are to be seasoned veterans, cultural 
WEeAaPpOoNnSs 

heroes or even the sons of gods, the Games Master is free to grant 
Not everyone in a society is expected to be armed; in fact some 

additional points or modify the maximum number which can be 
cultures expressly forbid weapons to those of a particular class or 

applied to a specific skill. 
caste. The most common weapons are usually simple and inexpen- 

Bonus Skill Points are used in the following way: 
sive; spears and axes for example which can be mass produced or 

& Allow the character the option of choosing one final new improvised. Only the higher classes tend to have ‘prestige’ weap- 

Combat Style or Professional Skill, reflecting a personal ons such as swords which require significant amounts of time to 

hobby or interest. manufacture. 

& Distribute points amongst whatever skills the character cur- 
rently has; increasing each skill by 1% for every point spent ARrmMOoUuRr 
on improving it. No individual skill can receive more points Perhaps even more restricted than weaponry, few members of 

than indicated by their Age Category. the lower classes possess armour, and what they own is usually hand 

Save for the optional hobby skill, no points may be assigned to crafted from fabrics or leather by their own family. Culture and 

those Combat Styles or Professional Skills not learned as part environment plays a big part in who is expected to own armour, 

of their Culture or Career. for example it would be rare to see common folk of a city storing 
armour at home, whereas it might be ubiquitous amongst a tribe of 
horse nomads. Metallic armours tend to be restricted to the wealthy 

34



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

BAacCkKgGrRoOuUnNdD EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt TAaBbLlEe 

Clothing Transport 

Roll 1d6-3. If the result is greater than 
One well used weapon of a 

One set of ragged, probably dirty zero the outworn armour is worth that 
Exile provenance suitable to the None 

clothes .. many AP, and covers 1d3 locations. 
character’s origin 

Otherwise no armour is owned 

One or two sets of clothes of a 

Slave quality suitable for the position and ~ None None None 

type of work performed by the slave 

Roll 1d3. This represents the Armour 
Two sets of common, undecorated ~ 1d2 simple weapons suited to the 

Points for the armour the character Own back, Raft, Handcart or 
Freeman clothes suitable to the freeman’s culture. Axes, clubs, knives, spears, 

has. Armour is available to cover 1d6 Beast of Burden 
occupation slings, and the like 

locations 

. 1d3+1 weapons of higher status, 
1d6+1 sets of clothing, made of . 

) . and/or quality. Swords, maces, Tull set of protection worth 1d2+2 Hired or Slave Porter, Boat, 
Gentry good quality fabrics and a modest . 

) shields, bows, great weapons, and Armour Points Wagon or Riding Mount 
level of decoration 

50 on 

1d6+3 sets of clothing, made of . . 
. . . . 1d3+3 weapons of expensive quality, Tull set of protection worth 1d2+3 Palanquin, Ship, Chariot or 

Aristocracy expensive fabrics and sporting lots . . 
. decorated with precious substances Armour Points Several Fine Mounts 

of decoration 

Expensive Palanquin with 
1d6+6 sets of clothing, made of 1d3+6 weapons of exquisite 

Tull set of protection worth 1d2+4 matched Bearers, Warship, 
Ruling rare, priceless materials and as craftsmanship, each of which are 

Armour Points Exquisite Carriage or Several 
opulent as good taste allows priceless due to heredity or materials 

Magnificent Mounts 

or those of noble class, and are often passed down as heirlooms. 
FoLlk MAaGgIiCc 

However, culture and setting might restrict the type of armour avail- 
Usually only learned by petty magicians or common folk in lands 

able to upper classes; for example the sons of a primitive tribal chief- 
where magic is ubiquitous, folk magic has minor effects upon the 

tain might not have access to iron mail hauberks, but could conceiv- 
world, outshone in comparison to the higher arts, but can be potent 

ably possess a type of hoplite plate carved from the bones or scales 
for all that. Folk magic originates from, and is connected to, the nat- 

of monsters instead. 
ural world, and the emotions of those within it. The ability to use 

TRrAaNnSsPpoORrTt folk magic is controlled by the skill of the same name. 

Choose a vessel or mount suited to the culture or environment 
the character comes from. Examples are given based upon the pri- ANnIiMmIisSmM 
mary mode of travel: foot, vessel, wheeled or mount. Some inter- Animists derive their magic from the summoning and control of 
pretation or leeway may be required, for instance a freeman from spirits and other supernatural creatures. These beings of the oth- 
a nomadic society might be expected to at least own a mount, or erworld are negotiated with or enslaved at the animist’s determi- 
perhaps it is something loaned to him by the patron or patriarch of nation, forming agreements with allied spirits or binding the less 
his family. willing into fetishes for later use. In exchange the animist must follow 

strict taboos or fulfil binding contracts. Animism relies on the skills 
of Trance and Binding. 

MAaGgIiCc 
MyTHRAS offers several different types of magic. Whether char- MYySsTtIicCiIsSmM 

acters begin play with access to these arts depends on their cultural Mystics draw their magic from the knowledge of self mastery 

background, starting career, and the accessibility of magic in the and understanding. Their insight into the inner self allows them to 

setting. More information on the kinds of magic available, how they achieve incredible acts of mental and physical excellence, making 

differ, how they work and the spells or abilities they begin with is them difficult to defeat in direct confrontation. Whilst their magic 

given later in the respective magic chapters. For now, it is necessary does not extend beyond themselves, they themselves become a tool 

only to know what sort of magic, if any, a character has learned, to manipulate the world about them. Mysticism uses the skill of the 

rather than a detailed knowledge of how it works. same name in addition to Meditation. 

35



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CAaRrEeEeRrSs 

SoORrCcEeRrYy CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr CRrEeAaTtIioOnN COoMmPpLlEeTtEe 
Sorcerers express their magical abilities by twisting the laws of Waorking through the fust three chaplers should now 

the world using the invocation of powerful spells. Whilst sorcery is have leftyou with a well-rounded, competent character with 
exceptionally flexible, it can often be unbound or dismissed by the an established culture, career; communaty and back-story. 
strength of other magics. Yet their independence from supernatural You have everythingyou need to begin play. 
beings means sorcerers never need to rely on anyone but themselves. Hopefully the character creation process will have also 
Sorcery uses the skills of Invocation and Shaping. set you thinking about your character's lfe, history and 

aspirations. What does he want from life? Why s she 

THhEeIisSmM adventuring? What are the things driving this character to 
 

rusk life and Limb? 
Theists are those who are rewarded with power from the gods in 

These are not questions that need to be answered imme- 
exchange for loyalty and service. Their miracles are potent as 

diately. Many answers will suggest themselves through 
they merely channel their gods’ own divine power, and can 

play, and one of the joys of MYTHRAS s discovering more 
be utterly devastating. Yet maintaining the bond requires 

aboutyour character as he or she develops in experience and 
continual dedication and constant sacrifices to ensure the 

maturity. 
deity remains appeased, or at least aware of their worship- 
per. Theism requires the skills of Devotion and Exhort. n 4 

Curlt MEeMmBEbeRrSsHhIiPp 
An optional stage for character development is cult 

or brotherhood membership. Many cultures of all types 
initiate their young adults into a cult or other form of 
social organisation as a rite of passage. If the character 
joins a cult it is likely one that either reflects the faith 
and beliefs of their family or their choice of career. 
Cuults and Brotherhoods offer access to training, and 
perhaps magic as well as providing a social, cultural, 
and professional network that characters will 
find useful. 

Cults and Brotherhoods are covered 
at length in their own chapter beginning 
on page 192. If Games Masters allow cult 
membership at this stage of character cre- 
ation it is suggested that no character should 
have a rank higher than Common Member. 

A hoplite from Meeros. He carres the 
traditional shortspear; scimitar, and sheeld of 
the 6th cohort. The crest on hus helm marks 
him as a sergeant, and the stylised symbol 
on his shield as an imitiate of the warrior 
cult of Myceras. 

36



Mythras:  Skills

— — 
|( I R i KI T S (LR SO QR <N B o B LB | 2 < B < e 

Skills
— — 

= i X o5 o3 oKk moWo > 
Yy m il S (LR SO QR <N B o B LB | 2 < B < e 

f characteristics and attributes define what a character is like, 

I CRrIiTtIicCaALlSs aAnNDd FuUMmBbLlEeSs 
] skills define what he can do. As explored in the previous chap- 

Criticals and Fumbles represent spectacular successes and cata- 
ters, all characters have a diverse set of skills drawn from their 

strophic failures; those cases where a character has either excelled in 
vocation and cultural backgrounds. This chapter explains how skills 

his attempt or failed miserably and utterly. 
work, and provides greater definition for each skill used in MYTHRAS. 

Skills are divided into two categories: Standard and Professional. & A Critical success is equal to one-tenth of the skill’s value (and 
Every character has the same set of Standard Skills. Professional this includes skills that receive a modifier — so modified skills 
Skills differ between individual characters and reflect expertise may have a greater or lesser chance of a Ciritical outcome). 
developed within a career and, to a certain extent, their culture. Round fractions up when calculating a Critical success’s 
Despite these distinctions, Standard and Professional Skills work in range. For example, if a skill is modified to twice its normal 
the same way. value — from 40% to 80% say, then its critical range would be 

This chapter looks, first of all, at the basics of how skills work. a roll of 08 or less. 
Then the skills, Standard and Professional, are described. The chap- « A Fumble is roll of 99 or 00. Skills with a value of more than 
ter then concludes with some additional rules for how to handle skills 100% fumble only on a roll of 00. 
in different ways, and under different circumstances. 

The precise nature of a Critical or Fumble result is left to the 
Games Master to determine. The consequences could be wondrous 

How Sk or dire, depending on the circumstances. However, some examples 
iiLlLls WOoRrKk of Ciritical and Fumble outcomes for each skill MYTHRAS uses are 

A skill has a base value based on two characteristics; or one char- given in the skill descriptions later in this chapter. 
acteristic multiplied by two. There is no upper limit to a skill’s value; 
it can exceed 100 and, in the course of play, characters can expect to AUuTtOoMmAaTtIiCc SUuCcCcEeSsSsEeSs 
see their skills reach such heights. 

There will be some occasions where a roll against a particular 
Whenever a character is called upon to resolve some form of test, 

skill just isn’t necessary — either because the task at hand is easily 
challenge or professional ability 1d100 is rolled and compared with 

accomplished, or because, with enough time and concentration, 
the skill’s value: 

success is guaranteed. Riding a horse at a gentle canter across an 

& Equal to, or less than, the skill indicates a success open meadow is an example of an Automatic Success where simply 

& Greater than the skill’s value indicates a failure being skilled in the activity means that straightforward actions do 
not require any skill roll to resolve them. A crafter carving a piece 

There are certain special cases concerning success and failure of wood into a chair leg is another example where a skill roll is not 
that should be noted. necessary; it takes time to accomplish, but the craftsman knows how 

& Any roll of 01-05 is always a success to do the work and, if he is not rushing, success is assured. A thief, 

& Any roll of 96-00 is always a failure, irrespective of how high undisturbed, with a set of lockpicks, can successfully pick the simple 

the skill’s value lock of a treasure chest given enough time to do so. 

37



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

WHhEeNn tToO ROoLlLl? SimMPpLlUiIfFiIeEdD DiirfrfFiiccuulLtTy GRrAaDdEeSs 
Part of the fun and drama of MYTHRAS comes in making a roll Whilst difficulty grades are designed to scale with character 

against a skill to see if success or failure is the outcome. It can be skill, some Games Masters may find applying penalties results in 
tempting to call for skill rolls for each and every challenge but, as the slowing down of their game. As an alternative the following 
outlined above, there are some cases where rolls are not needed. A option is provided: 
list of likely scenarios where skill rolls are redundant is as follows: 

SimPpLlIiFfIieEdD Diirfrficurlty GRrAaDdEe TAaBbLlEe 
& The activity or task is very routine to the character 

Difficulty Grade Skill Modifier 
& The character has enough time and all the tools necessary 

Very Easy +40% 
& The circumstances and environment do not impose any stress 

Easy +20% 
& There are no significant consequences to failure 

Standard None 

Skill rolls should be used when they have a dramatic purpose. For Hard -20% 
example, although riding a horse at a gentle canter requires no skill 

Formidable -40% 
roll, fleeing at a gallop from pursuing bandits does. Carving a chair 

Herculean -80% 
leg may be a routine task for a carpenter, but carving an exquisite 
chair leg, with blunt tools, and in only a few hours, for a demanding 8 P 
sultan who executes those who do not please him, would need a skill 
roll. It is usually obvious when a dramatic purpose arises and a skill 
roll is necessary, but if in doubt, consider the consequences of fail- StTaAnNdDaArRdD SKkIiLlLlSs 
ure: are they crucial to the plot? Does the chance of failure heighten Standard skills are common to everyone. They represent innate 

tension, and make for an exciting possibility? Will a failure — or even abilities and skills that most people employ on a regular basis from 

superb success — add fun to the game? If the answer is Yes to any of any walk of life. 

these, then have the character make a skill roll. 

ATtHhLlEeTtIiCcSs (SSTTRR+DEX)) 
MOoDdIFifYyIinNGg SKkIiLlLlSs Athletics covers a range of physical activities, including climb- 

There are some occasions where a skill roll is required but the ing, jumping, and running. If an adventurer is wearing armour, the 

chances of success need to be adjusted to reflect particular condi- distances he can climb, run or jump are affected by the Armour 

tions. Fleeing bandits, for instance, might require an Athletics roll. Penalty. The Movement section on page 69 describes these effects. 

But what if the character is fleeing through darkness or through 
treacherous undergrowth? In such a case the Games Master can insist CLlIimMBbIinNgG 
on modifying the skill of the character to reflect the circumstances. With the right surface (hand and footholds), the right equipment 

MyYTHRAS uses a series of grades to determine how a skill is mod- (ladders, ropes, pitons), and enough time, characters can climb any 

ified. These are as follows: surface without the need for a roll. Under normal circumstances, 
use the following guidelines: 

Diirfrficurlty GRrAaDdEe TAaBbLlEe 
& Climbing a rough or rugged surface (branching trees, scaf- 

Difficulty Grade Skill Modifier 
folds, piles of rubble, and so on): Half the Armour Penalty 

Automatic No need to roll (rounded up) is subtracted from the character’s base Move- 
Very Easy Double the skill value ment. If the result is zero or less, they are too encumbered by 
Easy Add half again to the skill value armour to climb. 

Standard No adjustment. & Climbing a steep surface (pitched roofs, steep hills, and so 

Hard Reduce the skill value by one third on): The Armour Penalty is subtracted directly from the base 

Tormidable Reduce the skill value by half Movement. If the result is zero or less, they are too burdened 
by armour to climb. 

Herculean Reduce the skill value to one tenth 
& Climbing a sheer surface (walls, cliff faces, and so on): Double 

Hopeless No attempt can be made 
the Armour Penalty is subtracted from the base Movement. 
As with previous situations, if the result is zero or less, the 

Where a character is already suffering a penalty from other cir- 
character cannot climb. 

cumstances the hardest difficulty grade takes precedence. 
& Tests should be made for treacherous surfaces (such as sheer 

MyTHRAS does not provide a definitive list of situations and chal- 
cliffs or wet surfaces), and if a character is distracted, or even 

lenges which can incur skill modifications. What sort of modifica- 
attacked, during his ascent or descent. 

tion is required for any particular skill or context is ultimately up 
to the Games Master to decide; according to the capabilities of the A critical success permuts the climber to scale the surface extremely quickly or 
characters, his perception of the difficulty of the situation, and the avoid any hidden danger involved with the attempt. 
dramatic tension at that particular moment. A failure merely indicates that the climb was aborted. 

A fumbled Climbing roll results in a_fall; furthermore the character cannot 
attempt an Acrobatics roll (if he has that skill) to reduce falling damage. 

38



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

JuumMPpIinNgG distractions and optimal conditions, a Boating roll is unnecessary, 

A successful Athletics roll allows one to jump up to twice one’s although lesser skilled characters may take longer to get where they 

own height horizontally or up to half one’s own height vertically need to as they manage the boat’s handling. 

(if the character has at least a five metres run-up available). If the A critical Boating success increases the vessel’s Movement rate by one tenth. 

jumper is jumping from a standing position then these distances A failed Boating roll implies the boat’s movement rate is halved or it failed 

are halved. Any jump of over half a character’s maximum distance to reach uts intended destination; for instance navigating to an isolated rock posi- 

results in him falling prone on landing. tioned above a waterfall. 
A fumbled Boating roll indicates losing an oay; taking on water or some other 

& If wearing armour reduce the jump distance in metres by serious tnconvenzence. If the weather is bad or the water violent, then a_fumble 
half the Armour Penalty to a minimum of one normal step. causes the boat to capsize. 

& Tor every full 20% a character has in Athletics, he can add an 
extra metre to a horizontal jump, or 20cm to a vertical one, if BraAwWNn (SSTTR+SSIIZ)) 
he has space to perform a run up. 

Brawn is the efficient application of technique when applying 
On a cnitical success the character adds a further metre to hus total distance, raw physical force. The skill covers acts of applied might, including 

and remains upright on landing. lifting, breaking, and contests of strength. 
A fumbled roll indicates the character has landed awkwardly. He must imme- 

duately make an Endurance roll. If the Endurance roll s a success 1 pownt of LIifFtTiInNgG 
damage 15 sustained to one leg. If the Endurance test fails, then 1d4 poiwnts of A character can lift and carry up to their STR in SIZ up off the 

damage 1s inflicted instead. ground, or drag double this amount, without needing a Brawn roll. 
As a mass equivalent, 1 point of SIZ equals, roughly, 5 kilograms. 

RUuNnNnIinNGg Tor every full 10% he possesses in the skill the character may add an 
A higher Athletics skill allows a character to run at a higher speed extra point of SIZ or 5kg to his total. 

over short or long distances. For SIZ or mass above this the character needs to succeed in a 
Brawn roll. The maximum weight a character can briefly lift is equal 

& For every full 25% a character has in Athletics, he can add 
to twice their STR, plus whatever bonus they gain from their skill. 

an extra metre to his base Movement when sprinting, or half 
Failing the Brawn roll may result in injury; the character must make a suc- 

that when running over longer distances. In certain situations 
cessful Endurance roll or suffer 1d3 points of damage to a random location 

where space may be limited, such as Charging within a melee, 
below the head. 

the character can decide not to apply this bonus, and remain 
Fumbling the Brawn roll automatically results in injury. 

at his base racial or species movement. 
Note that the size and shape of an object might make it impossi- 

On a critical success the character adds a_further metre to hus Movement rate. 
ble to lift, even if it is within the character’s weight capacity. 

A failure causes the runner to increase a level of fatigue. 
A fumbled roll indicates the character has pulled a muscle or torn a ligament, BRrEeAaKkIinNgG 

and must cease running He must immediately make an Fndurance roll. If the A character can use Brawn to break objects with their bare 
Endurance roll 15 a success 1 point of damage s sustained to one leg If the hands — such as shoulder barging a wooden door. Take the char- 
Endurance testfauls, then 1d4 points of damage 1s inflicted instead. acter’s maximum lifting capacity in SIZ and apply that value to the 

Damage Modifier table on page 9 to determine how much damage 
ThHRrOoWwIinNGg 

can be inflicted with each Brawn attempt, remembering that failed 
Athletics can also be used for hurling large, unwieldy objects 

rolls may result in injury. 
over distance or tossing smaller items with accuracy. Throwing is 
restricted for sports or improvised missile weapons - everything from COoNnTtEeSsTtSs oOFf StTrReEnNgGtThH 
small stones to bar stools. Weapons which are thrown using a spe- Brawn rolls can also be used in opposed tests for breaking free 
cific technique to ensure it strikes point or blade first (rather than from the grip of others, arm wrestling, and tugs of war. Such events 
just achieving distance), such as javelins, axes or knives, use their are handled as a simple opposed roll. However, there comes a point 
Combat Style instead. where technique cannot overcome superior size and strength. In a 

contest, if a character’s Damage Modifier is smaller than his oppo- 
& A thrown object has a maximum range of one metre for every 

nents, his Brawn roll suffers a penalty; a difference of one step raises 
point the character’s STR exceeds the object’s SIZ. 

the difficulty to Hard, whilst two steps increases it to Formidable, 
and so on. Naturally the penalty is suffered by his opponent if the 

BoAaTtIinNgG (SSTTRR++CCOON)) character is the stronger. 
The Boating skill covers the operation of small floating craft on 

rivers, lakes, and close inshore. Appropriate vessels are generally CooNncEceeAalL (DDEXX+PPOOW)) 
boats, canoes or rafts which travel short distances, and are unsuited 

Conceal is the counterpoint to Stealth, being the concealment 
to the rigours of the open sea. Most are propelled using oars, pad- 

of large objects rather than the character themselves. For instance 
dles, punts or simple sails; or can even be towed by animals. Ships 

conceal could be used to hide a chariot behind some rocks, or sweep 
with large crews or designed for long, overseas journeys are covered 

away the wheel ruts of the chariot so its path cannot be tracked. 
under the Seamanship professional skill. 

The skill is versatile in application, anything from hiding a scroll in a 
The skill measures a character’s competence in propelling a boat 

library to disguising the presence of a trap or secret passage. 
in the right direction and dealing with adverse conditions. With no 

39



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

A critical success using Conceal indicates that the object has been hidden so Deecceerirt (IINNTT++CCHA)) 
cunningly that rolls attempting to discover it are one difficully grade harder. 

Deceit covers all instances where a character attempts to mask 
A failed Conceal roll means that the object will automatically be_found if 

the truth and offer a deceit of some kind; barefaced lying, mislead- 
actively searchedf or. 

ing a guard or even bluffing (or cheating) during a card game. The 
A fumbled Conceal roll indicates that the attempt backfres spectacularly with 

skill also covers instances where hiding true emotions or motives is 
the objectf alling, rolling, blowing out of its hiding place so blatantly (or otherwise 

necessary (feigning pleasure when one is bitterly disappointed per- 
revealed in an appropriate manner) that it draws the attention of everyone nearby. 

haps, or attempting to seem welcoming and open when the opposite 
is true). Deceit forms a counterpart to the Insight skill, and can be 

CuussttooMmms (IINNT x2) used to oppose Insight rolls when others are attempting to discern 
Customs represents the character’s knowledge of his own com- either truth or motive. 

munity; its social codes, rites, rituals, taboos, and so on. The skill On a critical success the character has pulled off the deceit convincingly to the 
is used when it is essential to accurately interpret or perform any point where the truth will not be questioned in thefuture by those who are subject 
socially important custom or to behave in a particular way. lo the deception — unless something happens lo expose the truth. 
A critical success with Customs indicates that the character has acted in an A farled Deceit roll indicates that the character lacked conviction or believabil- 

exemplary fashion or percewed a very subtle social nuance that will be of imme- iy, promptingf urther investigation. 
diate or later value. A fumbled Deceit roll represents a miserablef ailure to deceive — one so trans- 
A failed Customs roll results in wry humour or minor irritation. A _fumbled parent that others may have difficully believing the character at a_future time. 

Customs 10!l indicates that the character has badly failed to observe his commu- 
nity’s customs, and may have even given offence — whether intentional or not. Drriive (DDEXX+PPOOW)) 

The ramifications of a_fumbled roll depend very much on the nature of the 
Drive covers the control of wheeled or drawn vehicles, whether 

culture or communty, and may thus have very different outcomes, ranging from 
by one or more beasts of burden or more esoteric means: such as 

harsh rebuke, through ostracism, exile or even violent punishment. 
carts, carriages, chariots or sleds. Drive rolls are needed when a 
character wants to do something out of the ordinary with a vehicle 

DAaNnCcEe (DDEX+CHA)) — traverse treacherous terrain, jump obstacles, and so on. A roll is 
Just about every culture uses dance in some way — either as rec- also necessary if the vehicle being driven is drawn by different beasts 

reation or as part of important rituals. It might be a court dance, a than the driver is used to (horses instead of oxen, for example) or 
war dance, or a simple set of movements accompanying a prayer there are more or fewer beasts teamed together to pull the vehicle (a 
or ceremonial chant. The Dance skill measures a character’s ability four-horse wagon when the character is used to a two-horse team). 
to move rhythmically and accurately (to a reasonable degree) when In cases where either the beasts or their number are radically unfa- 
called upon to do so. miliar, a tiger drawn chariot for example, then the roll should be 
A critical success resulls in a dance that is expresswe, fluid, and perhaps made more difficult. 

deeply affecting for those who witness it. The dance s as persuasive as any Where two or more vehicles are contesting with each other, per- 
Influence 10ll, and can be used as such in situations resting on communication haps to overtake or force another off the road, the drivers should 
and personal credibility. Alternatively any subsequent Influence lest is giwven a determine the result with an opposed Drive test. 
bonus equal to the critical score of the Dance skill. Of cowrse, a critical Dance 
roll may very well result in tumultuous applause, and tokens of admiration and 
appreciation. 

A failed Dance roll signi- 
Jies a lacklustre performance. 

A fumbled Dance s 
clumsy to both the dancer 
and those who watch it. The 
dancer trips or stumbles. Pas- 
son s lost, the execution s 
weak, and the dance fails to 
convey what it s meant to. 
Any skills resting on commu- 
nicaton and personal credi- 
bility will suffer a penally at 
the discretion of the Games 
Master. 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

A critical Drive roll either increases the vehucle’s Movement rate by one tenth ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
or permats the driver lo perform some_feat of skilful orflamboyant driving. Anathaym, investigating a ruined temple, comes across a sarcophagus in 

A failed Driwe roll halves the vehicle’s Movement. the catacombs. She tries to open i, and triggers the centuries-old dart trap set 
A fumbled Drive roll indicates either that the vehicle has broken down in by the sarcophagus’s designer. The trap-setter’s skill at the time was 65%; 

some manner (wheel comes off or the harness breaks for example), or if the Anathaym’s Evade is 57 %o which she must pit against the trap in an opposed 
velicle is engaged in a high speed or dangerous manoewvre, it becomes unstable roll. 
and overturns. An overturning vehicle requires all occupants to make a successful Amathaym scores 45, and the Games Master rolls 31. Both are successful 
Acrobatics or Evade 1oll to leap clear of the wreckage, or sustain an amount of but Anathaym wins the contest with the higher roll. The trap is sprung as 
Jalling damage commensurate with its speed (see page 78). Anathaym lfls the sarcophagus lid, shooting a hail of darts towards herf ace; 

but Anathaym throws herself desperately to one side and, fortunately for her, 

EnNDdUuRrAaNnCcEe (CCOON x2) the darts strike the wall behind. 

Endurance is a character’s capacity to endure physical stress, Brushing herself down as she stands, Anathaym reflects on the dangers of 

pain, and fatigue. It measures the body’s ability to deal with poten- ancient tombs, unaware of the guardian mummy lurching towards her from 

tially damaging or debilitating conditions, and is a general gauge of belind... 

resilience, stamina, and metabolism. Endurance, like its counterpart 
A failed roll usually means the character suffers whatever musfortune they 

Willpower, is used in any number of ways, but most specifically to 
were attempting to avoud. 

resist the possible effects of injuries, including harmful poisons and 
1If the Evade roll is fumbled, then the character has lefl himself wide open to 

disease. 
the hazard, for instance sustaining maximum damage from a trap or ending up 

In most cases Endurance is used in Opposed 'Tests but there are 
prone, and vulnerable to a_follow up event. 

some circumstances where it is used as a standard skill roll. 
The effects of Criticals and Fumbles during combat us a special case (see the 

A critical Endurance roll usually indicates that the character has managed to 
rules for Evading in the Combat chapter; page 105). 

shrugoff” the worst possible assault on his body. In the case of injury he s ofien 
able to act when ordinarily he might be incapacitated. 

A failed Endurance roll resulls in the character succumbing to whatever stress FirstT AiidD (DDEX+INT)) 
or tnjury it has been put under. A Fumbled roll means that the character is over- First Aid measures a character’s ability to treat minor injuries 
whelmed by the circumstances and becomes incapacitated. In the case of disease and stabilise severe ones. First Aid may be applied only once per spe- 
or powson he automatically fails any further resistance rolls against it. cific injury. Thus a character thatis slashed twice in the leg may have 

each wound treated separately. If suffering some form of bodily 

Evadpe (DDEX x2) harm which simultaneously affected several body areas at once, such 
as being burned by Dragon Breath, then a First Aid attempt is per- 

Evade is used to escape from observed, impending danger, and 
mitted for each individual location. 

can be used against ranged weapons (by diving for cover, for exam- 
A character can self-administer First Aid, although depending 

ple), avoiding traps, changing the engagement distance in combat, 
on the circumstances (such as the location of the wound, its degree 

and generally getting out of the way of a potential physical hazard. 
of severity and so forth) the roll may be subject to a greater degree 

It can also be used as a resistance roll for certain types of magic. 
of difficulty. 

Usually Evade will be opposed by another roll, but it may also be 
Applying First Aid takes 1d3 minutes. Neither party can do 

a standard roll in its own right. Trying to negate damage by leap- 
anything else during the treatment. When tending life threatening 

ing clear of a crashing vehicle, as mentioned in the Drive skill, is 
trauma, the patient is temporarily stabilised until the result of the 

an example of a standard Evade roll. The typical circumstances for 
opposed rolls are as follows: 

FIirRsstT AIidD ACcTtIioONnSs 
AVvOoIiDdIinNgG MISisSsIiLlEeSs Injury Successful Treatment 

Evade is opposed by the Combat Style of the attacker. Asphyxiated The victim begins breathing again. 

Bleeding The blood flow is staunched. 
THhWwAaRrTtIinNgG Aa TRrAaPp 

The impaling item is removed without causing 
Evade is opposed either by the trap’s Potency or its original Impaled . 

further damage to the victim. 
designer’s skill rating at the time the trap was made or set. 

As long as the unconsciousness is not the result of 

EVvaADdIinNgG aA HAaRrMmFfUuLl SPpEeLlLl Unconsciousness poisons or narcotics then the injured party is restored 

Opposed by the spell caster’s score in the casting skill. to awareness. 

Minor Wound Treatment restores 1d3 hit points to the injury. 

MAaNnOoEeUuVvEeRrIinNGg iInN COoMmBbAaTt Sterttesms WWissmord] Treatment restores the location to partial 
erious Woun . 

Opposed by the attacker’s Evade skill. functionality. 

A successful First Aid roll on a location suffering 

Again, like Endurance, Evade is most often used in Opposed from a Major Wound does not return any Hit Points, 

Tests. When used as a standard test, a critical Evade roll ensures . i nor restore functionality; but it does stabilize the 
Major Wound i i i 

that the evader retains some form of advantage or composure after- area, and prevent immediate death resulting from 

wards, such as avoiding all damage or slipping completely clear of the damage. More skilled healing is required to treat 

further danger. Major Wounds. 

41



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

application is known. An injury that has had a previous form of First LocaLle (IINNT x2) 
Aid applied cannot benefit from First Aid again, whether successful 

Locale measures a character’s understanding of local flora, 
or not, until it has fully healed. 

fauna, terrain, and weather in the area where he has spent the major- 
First Aid relies on having appropriate equipment — bandages, at 

ity of his life, usually within his community. The character knows the 
the very least — available for the treatment. These can be improvised 

common plants, trees and animals, their properties and behaviour: 
(a torn cloak to make a bandage or sling, for example) if necessary. 

where the best fish can be found; the movements of game creatures; 
A eritical First Aid improves the result of the treatment. On a Minor Injury 

where to find shelter; the likely weather for the season, and the most 
at recovers 1d6 Hit Points, on a Serious Injury it recovers 1d3 Hit Ponts, and 

common regional dangers. In neighbouring, yet unfamiliar locations 
on a Major Injury it restores partial functionality (if possible), and permats it 

Locale should be made one or more grades harder. 
to heal naturally. 

A critical success guarantees the character finds what he s looking for in 
A fumbled Furst Aid attempt causes more harm than good: the injured location 

abundance or knows precisely what something 1s. Subsequent skill rolls related 
suffers a_further 1 point of damage, potentially increasing the severity of the 
injury. lo the subject of that Locale roll (Survival, for instance, or Track) become one 

grade easuer: 
A farlure implies too little evidence to unambiguously dentify or predict, or 

InNfFlLuUeEnNCcEe (CCHHA x2) that whatever is being searchedf or cannot be_found. 
Influence measures a character’s ability to persuade others. It is A fumble means the information needed is not just unobtainable but utterly 

used in a wide variety of situations; from changing someone’s mind, misunderstood. Subsequent skill rolls dependent on that use of Locale become one 
through to bribing an official or guard. grade harder: 

Influence rolls are typically opposed by the Perception, Will- 
power or another Influence skill, depending on the circumstances, NAaTtIiVvEe ToONnGgUuEe (IINNTT++CCHA)) 
and are modified by how much a character is trying to influence 

Native Tongue is the ability to speak one’s own language, the 
behaviour. Attempting to persuade a close friend to loan you their 

one learned whilst growing up in one’s home culture. It measures 
horse may be relatively easy. Getting a usually incorruptible bureau- 

articulation, eloquence, and the depth of the speaker’s vocabulary. 
crat to accept a bribe is more difficult. 

Unlike other skills, Native Tongue is not rolled against directly. 
A critical success indicates that the character has been incredibly persuasive, 

Instead it is treated as a static representation of overall fluency, limit- 
s0 much so that not only s the character successful in what he is trying to attain 

ing the level of conversational interaction. This is described in more 
but his next Influence test with the same person, no matler when it lakes place, 

detail under the Language skill on page 47, but starting characters 
is one grade easier than the circumstances would normally dictate (A Standard 

usually begin play fully fluent in their mother tongue. 
r0ll becomes an Easy roll, for example, or a Hard roll becomes a Standard one). 

The skill can be used in two ways. Firstly it can help to under- 
A failure merely means that the persuasion was refused, with no subsequent 

stand dialects of neighbouring peoples which share a common lin- 
ussues. 

guistic basis or origin. In such cases the skill is treated at least one 
On a_fumble not only does the Influence roll faul; it also insults or offends 

grade harder, potentially affecting the character’s fluency. Secondly, 
the person being influenced. The specific reaction depends on the individual and 

it can be used as a cap on verbal skills which require a good grasp of 
the situation. 1t also means that_further Influence attempts with this individual 

language. See Capping Skills on page 50. 
become one difficully grade harder. 

InNsSiIgGhHTt (IINNTT++PPOOW)) PEeRrCcEePpTtiIoOnN (IINNTT++PPOOW)) 
Perception is used for both passive observation and focussed 

Insight is the ability to read or intuitively define another’s verbal 
detection; whether hunting for something specific, a general scan 

and non-verbal behaviour (such as body language or the manner of 
of an area or simple awareness of their surroundings. Specific con- 

speech) to establish their motives and state of mind. Insight is used 
ditions — darkness, for example — may affect the difficulty grade 

to determine if someone is telling a lie (and it can be opposed by the 
of the skill roll depending on the primary senses being utilised. 

other person’s Deceit skill), or to predict how someone feels about 
Strong scents might make an olfactory Perception roll Easy rather 

a particular situation. Insight can equally be applied to particular 
than Standard, whereas trying to eavesdrop on a conversation in a 

situations as well as other people: is that tavern a haven for trouble? 
crowded and noisy tavern would make the roll Hard. 

Could the bandits be planning an ambush in the nearby hills? 
A critical Perception roll reveals things that otherwise would not have been 

On a critical success the Insightful character gains an in-depth understanding 
detected in addition to that which the roll was being usedf or. 

of the other person’s current motives, thoughts and feelings. Using either Decert 
Failure indicates nothang in particular was discerned. 

or Influence against that person in a subsequent 1ol is one grade easier than 
Fumbling a Perception roll means that even the most blatantly obvious things 

circumstances would dictate (Easy rather than Standard; Standard rather than 
are overlooked or masconstrued, potentially increasing the difficulty of subsequent 

Hard, for example). 
skall checks. For instance, a_fumbled Perception roll when trying lo spot a trap 

A failure simply means the character cannot discern anything specific at that 
maght make an Evade roll Hard or even Formidable rather than Standard. 

time. On a_fumble, the character completely misjudges the person’s motives and 
actions. The Games Master should offer the character a series of private, deliber- 
ately misleading hints regarding the person’s motivations and likely actions. It also 
makes consequent Deceit and Influence rolls one difficulty grade harder: 

42



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

RiidDe (DDEXX+PPOOW)) 
Ride covers the ability to control and remain mounted on those 

creatures that are trained to be ridden. The skill can be applied to 
a diverse range of beasts, everything from mules to elephants; even 
flying or swimming creatures such as giant eagles or dolphins. 

Riding an unfamiliar species is always one difficulty grade 
harder; whilst riding a species of a different medium (a horseman 
riding a dragon, for example) is two grades harder. Wild, untamed 
creatures cannot be ridden in a constructive manner until they have 
been broken and trained to be riding beasts. 

A critical Ride result allows the rider to perform a feat of flamboyant riding 
(such as a jump or wingover) or temporarily increase his mount’s Movement by 
one tenth. 

A failure causes the mount to drop a level off atigue. 
A fumbled r0ll means that an accident occurs; either lo the rider (who might 

Jall off) or the mount whom suffers some_ form of injury, going lame or breaking 
one of uls limbsfor example. 

SIinNgG (PPOOWW+CHAA)) 
Carrying a tune is covered by Sing, anything from monotonous 

chants through to complex arias. Singing is an inherent part of 
most cultures, a prime source of entertainment, and perhaps used 
in its rituals. Important songs might be used for courting, inspiring 
soldiers before battle, or simply recounting a historical deed. The 
skill reflects the user’s ability to maintain rhythm, keep in key and 
remember the correct words. 

A critical Sing success can have one of several effects. If singing to earn 
money, increase by half again the amount earned due to the audience’s apprecia- 
tion of the performance. If being used to impress someone, a follow-up Influence time. Higher Swim percentages indicate being able to negotiate 
or similar skill become one difficulty grade easier to make. deeper and stronger waters, with less risk of drowning. Making a 

A failed Sing roll signifies a bland performance. Iff umbled, then the song was Swim roll therefore depends entirely on the conditions. Rough seas, 
off-key, out of tune, and poorly recewed. Halve the earnings and any attempts to strong currents, white water and rip-tides all reduce the grade of 
influence or deceive afterwards become one grade harder. the skill no matter what the character’s affinity for water might be. 

Under normal conditions a character’s maximum swimming speed 

STteaALltThH (DDEX+INT)) per round is equal to their base Movement rate, plus an extra metre 

Hiding out of plain sight, or moving with minimal sound are for every full 20% they possess in Swim. 

covered by the Stealth skill. Cover and conditions, such as darkness A critical Swim roll allows the character to add a further metre to hus Move- 

or loud background noise, improve the grade of the skill according ment rate. 

to specifics of the environment. Similarly adverse conditions, such Failing a Swim 10ll has no immediate consequences, save that the character 

as a lack of cover or a quiet night will decrease the skill’s grade. Cir- gains a level of Fatigue. 

cumstances also affect the difficulty of the attempt. For instance, a If a Swim roll is_fumbled then controlled movement ceases as the swimmer 

warrior wearing heavy armour can easily conceal themselves behind begins suffering cramps or is overwhelmed by turbulent conditions; future Swim 

a wall providing they stand still or move very slowly, whereas moving 10lls become one grade more difficult. From that moment on, all the swimmer 

quickly might cause their armour to jingle. can do s try to keep their head above water until help arrives or they become 

A critical roll means that any subsequent attempts lo use skills to locate the exhausted, at which point they’ll likely start to drown. See the rules for Asphyx- 

character; follow lam, observe him, and so_forth are one grade harder. tation on page 71. 

A failure indicates that they are blatantly obvious, providing someone is both- 
ering to locate them. UNnAaRrMmEeDd (SSTTRR+DEX)) 

On a_fumble the Stealth attempt has backfired and signals the character’s Unarmed is a universal Combat Style common to all characters, 
presence rather than disguises it, or causes them to suffer some accident or mas- measuring the ability to defend oneself without the aid of weapons. 
Jortune; such as hiding on a window ledge then being knocked off when someone The Unarmed skill covers the brawling and wrestling techniques 
opens the shutter to investigate the strange noise. known by that culture. However there are, of course, specific styles 

that enhance the ability to fight without weapons, offering advan- 

Swim (SSTTRR++CCOON)) tages to those who learn them as a separate Combat Style. 

Without development the ability to swim is limited to being able As Unarmed is a Combat Style its critical and fumble effects are 

to thrash around, and keep one’s head above the water for a short covered by the rules for combat, as detailed in the Combat chapter. 

43



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

WiiLlLlpPoOwWEeRr (PPOOWW x2) perform convincingly: on stage, for example, or attempting to pass 
oneself off as another person. 

Willpower is a measure of a character’s ability to concentrate, 
A critical success us thoroughly convincing. In a performance context it guar- 

channel his force of will in a particular direction, or harden his psy- 
antees a standing ovation or similar. In a social context then the actor is the 

che to possible mental shock. Itis also a measure of personal resolve. 
character ke portrays. It also means that any subsequent skill roll, such as Deceit, 

The skill is used in all manner of situations where mental resilience 
Influence or similay, s one difficulty grade easier (Easy rather than Standard, 

is required, and this includes resisting magic. Although not a mea- 
Jor example). 

sure of sanity it can be used to endure traumatic events that would 
Failed rolls signify a lacklustre performance. 

shake even the sanest, stable mind. Willpower is the mental counter- 
Fumbling an Acting roll means the performance convinces no-one, and is so 

part to Endurance. 
bad that even the most unperceptive will see through the act, or perhaps worse, 

Again, like Endurance and Evade, Willpower is most often used 
laugh andj eer. 

in Opposed Tests. When used as a standard test, a critical Willpower 
roll indicates that the character has hardened his mind and spirit to 
the extent that no further attempts to influence him, or shake his AccrroosbaaTtiics (SSTTRR+DEX)) 
resolve, will work. In the case of resisting magic, a critical success Acrobatics covers acts of balance, gymnastics, juggling and tum- 

means that no further mentally afflicting spells cast by the opponent bling. The skill can be used in its own right as a way to impress 

have any effect on the character for the remainder of that encounter. an audience, but also to help mitigate damage from falls. With a 

The effects of failing a Willpower roll depend on the situation successful roll a character can move at full speed and sure-footedly 

and circumstances — usually temporary capitulation to whatever is across an unstable or narrow surface. If trying to mitigate damage 

being done to him. A fumbled Willpower roll means that the charac- from an unexpected fall, a successful Acrobatics reduces the distance 

ter is utterly overwhelmed. His will is broken, and he has no means as explained on page 78, Falling. 

of resisting whatever it is that assails him mentally or spiritually. In Acrobatics can be substituted for Evade if the situation warrants 

the case of resisting shock or spells a fumbled Willpower roll means it. The benefit of this is that if the roll is a success, the character 

that the psychological effect of the spell becomes permanent until automatically avoids ending up prone. 

healed. A critical success doubles the movement rate when balancing or negotiating 
an unstable surface. 

Failing an Acrobatics roll results in an unimpressed audience, or the prema- 
OppPtTiIoOnNaALl RUuLlEe –— LimIiTtSs tToO ture aborting of whatever trick or tumble was attempted. 

EnNDdUuRrAaNnCcEe AanNDd WIiLlLlpPoOwWEeRr A fumbled Acrobatics roll means that balance and agility has been completely 
There are limuts to mental, and physical endurance; barrers beyond lost, causing the character to eitherfall off whatever he was balancing upon, drop 

which the mind, and body cannot be pushed, and surrender becomes inevi- a juggled object in a spectacularly bad way, or injure themselves performing an 
table. Games Masters may wish to rule in therr campaign that Endurance acrobatic tumble — suffering 1d4 points of damage to a random location. 
cannot exceed CON x5, and Willpower cannot exceed POW x5. The 
starting values for each skill are both calculated as normal, but have a ARrTt (PPOOWW+CHAA)) 
defined limat. 

There are many specific art forms. Painting to Poetry; Literature 

N 4 to Sculpture. A character chooses an Art specialisation when taking 
this skill. Subsequent Art forms are advanced in separately. A roll is 
made whenever a character must impress or convince through his 

P artistic medium. 
RrOoFfEeSsSsiIoOnNAaLl SKkIiLlLlSs A critical success inducates that artist creates something of stunming quality, 
Professional Skills differ between characters and represent more elegance or beauty — worth half the standard value again of like products. Any 

specialised forms of training and experience. Some Professional subsequent skill rolls made to influence whomever commissioned the work, or those 
skills are gathered through cultural background and a character’s that simply admare it, become temporarily one grade easier. 
career, as the name suggests. Although they differ between charac- Failing the roll creates something insipid, which neither impresses or sells _for 
ters they work in the same way as Standard Skills. more than the materials used to create ut. 

Certain magical skills are also classed as Professional Skills: Invo- A fumbled Art roll renders an artistic disaster. The effects of such a terrible 
cation and Shaping are the two skills associated with Sorcery for sttuation need to be determined by the Games Master but, at the very least, rep- 
example. These are only briefly described here. For more details see resent a complete waste of lime, materials, and talent that, if viewed publicly, 

the relevant magical chapter. could influence reputation. 

AccTtIinNgG (CCHHA x2) BIinNdDIinNgG (PPOOWW+CHAA)) 
Acting governs the art of being able to impersonate and convey Binding is a magical skill used by animists to exert their will over 

a completely different character, whether in a staged performance spirits and creatures of the otherworld. It is used to bind spirits into 
or in a social situation. The actor portrays a personality and man- fetishes, and control their actions once bound. Additionally, it can be 
nerisms different to his own in a convincing manner. Coupled with used to summon and coerce a known spirit to perform a deed for a 
the Disguise and Deceit skills, this is a powerful way of becoming mutually acceptable service, forging a contract between them. 
someone else entirely. An Acting roll is needed when it is essential to 

44



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

Moreover the skill is used when engaging in Spirit Combat, and Failing a Courtesy roll means the user has not impressed the 
also measures the authority an animist has within a spirit cult. For company with his attitude or manners; making any subsequent skill 
further details see page 131 of the Animism chapter. rolls a grade harder. 

Binding is not limited to animists. The skill can be learned by A fumbled Courtesy roll creates severe embarrassment and 
other magical practitioners, and used in the binding of supernatural humiliation and, at worst, gives insult that, depending on the cir- 
entities such as elementals and demons. cumstances, could have a dire outcome. No further social inter- 

course 1s possible after a fumble. 

BUuRrEeAaUuCcRrAaCcYy (IINNT x2) 
Understanding administrative procedures, records, and unspo- CrrRaAfFtT (DDEX+INT)) 

ken conventions are covered by the Bureaucracy skill. It is used Each Craft is a specialised form, and there are as many crafts 
to interact with officials or discover pertinent civic information. as there are professions for them. Like Art, Craft is used to create 
Depending on the sophistication of their culture, bureaucrats need the subject item. How long it takes depends entirely on the nature 
not necessarily be literate. However their Bureaucracy skill cannot of the product: weaving a rug takes longer than throwing a pot, for 
exceed the score of the Language or Literacy skill in which they instance, but time is not necessarily the most important factor: it is 
work. Whenever red-tape or administrative landscapes need to be the skill of the crafter, the quality of the resources, and attention to 
navigated, a Bureaucracy roll is necessary. detail. 

Critically succeeding in Bureaucracy lends a deep insight into the procedures A critical success creates an tem of superior quality, in terms of durability, 
andf ormalities of whatever 1t is the character 1s attempting to accomplish, achzev- utility or beauty. 
ing it in half the usual time. It also means any subsequent skills relying on the A failed Craft roll indicates a sub-standard result undermining its robustness, 
Bureaucracy roll are one grade easter (Influence, for example, or Decent). Junction or aesthetics. 

A farlure resulls in becoming stonewalled or relevant documents misplaced, A fumbled roll creates an item that isfunctionally useless and valueless. Alter- 
the user’s inability lo follow customary procedure resulting in subsequent skills natwely an accident occurs during the crafling process, causing damage to prop- 
relevant to the situation becoming one grade harder. erty, stock or the crafter themselves; a pottery kiln collapsing or a smath striking hes 

1f the roll is_fumbled then access is_forbidden or the character alenates a key hand with a hammerf or example. 
personage — so that their enquiry or request will never be satisfied. 

CuurlTttuure (IINNT x2) 
CoMmMmEeRrCcEe (IINNTT++CCHA)) Culture is the more specific form of the Standard Skill of Cus- 

Commerce is used to evaluate the worth of goods and commod- toms, relating instead to societies foreign to the character’s own. 
ities, and to trade them for the best possible price. It is also used Each Culture skill must be given a particular nation or society to 
to understand the intricacies of business transactions in addition to which it applies. Mechanically it works in the same way as the Cus- 
securing a profit. A further use is in finding the best way to dispose toms skill. 
of stolen and illicit goods — again for the best possible price. Com- 
merce is obviously used when trading, and it can be opposed by DeevoTtionN (PPOOWW+CHAA)) 
either an opponent’s Commerce skill or Willpower, reflecting the 

Devotion is a magical skill which reflects the commitment of 
opposing side’s attempts to further the deal in their favour. It is also 

priests, and their ilk to the service of a deity or pantheon of gods. It 
used to judge the market value of goods, gaining an idea of price 

not only measures the depth of devotion to a deity, but also governs 
and where it will be best traded. 

the magnitude of any theistic miracles called upon by the theist, and 
In transactions where rolls are not opposed, a critical success allows the char- 

the recovery of these blessings at an appropriate holy place. 
acter to secure the commoduty or service at half its usual price, or sell itfor double. 

Additionally the skill can indicate the standing of a theist within a 
Failing the roll indicates that the commodity or service is secured at twice the 

religious cult. For further details see page 178 of the Theism chapter. 
price, or sold_for only half the value. 

In some settings Devotion is not limited to professional priests. 
A fumble means the character has insulted the purchaser or seller to such 

It may be adopted by those who simply wish to show respect to the 
a degree that the transaction s lost. Alternatively it may indicate that they are 

gods even if they do not actively practice Theism, or indeed if the 
cheated instead, ending up paying for something worthless or unwittingly selling 

gods exist at all! 
sometling of potentially great value at a_fraction of its cost. 

Also see the section on Haggling, page 56. 
Diiscguuiise (IINNTT++CCHA)) 

CouurrTteessy (IINNTT++CCHA)) Effecting a convincing disguise, using appropriate materials (cos- 
tumes, cosmetics, wigs or hairpieces), is covered by the Disguise skill. 

This skill covers understanding how to act appropriately in a 
Creating the disguise requires time and attention to detail, as well as 

social or formal situation: modes of address, rituals, and conven- 
access to the right materials to make it convincing. If some, or all, 

tions of behaviour, and so forth. It includes everything from who to 
of these elements are not present then the Disguise roll’s difficulty 

bow to, and when, to how low; from when to use a particular title, to 
grade is made one or more steps harder. 

when it is appropriate to act informally. 
Disguise can be augmented with Acting to enhance the overall 

Ciritically succeeding in a Courtesy roll makes any subsequent 
effect of a deception (vice versa when performing), and so the two 

skill roll relevant to that situation one difficulty grade easier. 
skills are complementary. 

45



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

A critical Disguise roll results in a completely convincing masquerade so GAaMmBbLlIinNGg (IINNTT++PPOOW)) 
potent that even their own mother or a lifelong enemy probably wouldn’t recognise 

The Gambling skill measures a character’s competence in games 
them. 

of chance, and especially where money is staked on the outcome. It 
Failing a disguise 1oll resulls in such a meagre attempt it permits passive 

is used to assess the odds of success or failure or spot when some- 
onlookers the chance to see through it. 

one is cheating. The skill can be used in an opposed or unopposed 
A fumbled Disguise roll either produces a disguise so crass that it instantly 

manner, depending on the situation. Spending the night in a face- 
penetrated; or one whichf ails at a spectacularly inopportune moment. No amount 

less gambling den might only require a straight test, whereas a high 
of great acting can salvage the illusion when a_false nose peels away or a poorly 

stakes dice game involving notable personages may instead require 
Satted costume rips off. 

several rounds of opposed rolls. 
A enitical Gambling success usually permats the character to win a game 

ENnGgIiNnEeEeRrIinNgG (IINNT x2) outright or clean out one of the participants. 
The design and building of large-scale structures, from houses Failure simply results in the character losing that hand or stake. 

to bridges, gates to siege engines, is in the remit of the Engineering On a_fumble, the character has completely misread the odds or has tragic bad 
skill. Rolls are necessary when planning large scale projects to ensure luck. He loses everything gambled and us thrown out of the game. 
correct construction, but are also made when an engineer wants to Cheating allows a character to roll twice and take the best 
assess a structure’s integrity for whatever reason (state of repair or result. However each time this is attempted the cheater must roll 
weak spots, for example). an opposed test of their Sleight skill against the Perception or Gam- 

A critical success lughlights any unnoticeable major flaws or problems with bling skill of everyone else playing. lailing to beat all the observers 
the item under study. It also makes subsequent rolls dependent on the structure one means that the cheater has been detected, with suitable results. 
grade easier. Alternately it may allow a lougher, more resilient construction to be 
bult (a tenth more Hit Points or Armour Points). 

Failing an Engineering roll resulls in a construction which s sub-standard Healuincg (IINNTT++PPOOW)) 
Healing is the in-depth knowledge of medical procedures, 

(a tenthfewer Hit Points or Armour Points) or an inability to determine any 
based on cultural practices. In a primitive or barbarian cul- 

structural information. 
ture, for instance, healing will be based on the 

A fumble actively introduces a majorflaw into a proj- 
ect or disastrously assesses the condition of an item, knowledge of herbs, and natural cures. In a 

civilised culture, drugs and more advanced 
providing incorrect and musleading information. Sub- 

treatments will be more common. In all 
sequent rolls dependent on the Engineering check are ‘e 

cultures Healing includes the ability to set 
made one grade harder. 

bones, suture wounds, and so forth. Obvi- 
ously applying healing requires appropriate 

ExXhHOoRrTt resources, and most practicing healers will 

(IINNTT++CCHA)) o have such things to hand (needles, gut or 
thread for sutures, herbs for poultices, and so 

Exhort is the magical skill used 
forth). There are three main areas of Healing: 

to call upon and channel the power 
of the gods. It includes knowledge i TRrEeAaTtIinNgG SEerRIioOuUSs WOoUuNnDdSs 
of the history, myths, rituals, practices, \ A successful Healing roll restores 1d3 Hit 
prayers, and powers of the god or pantheon, Points to a Seriously Injured locaton. On a criti- 
and is essential to Theistic magic, being used to cal success this is raised to 1d3+1. If fumbled, damage is 
manifest divine miracles. For further details see page increased by 1 Hit Point. 
178-179 of the Theism chapter. 

TRrEeAaTtIinNgG DIiSsEeAaSsEeSs 
FoLlk MAaGgIic AanNDd PoOiIssoOnNs 

If Healing is performed 

(PPOOWW+CHAA)) prior to the onset time, it coun- 

Minor, petty magics teracts the disease or toxin 
are cast using this skill. It entirely, providing it over- 
represents  the character’s comes the Potency of the 

knowledge  of charms, malady in an opposed roll. 
cantrips or blessings, and If performed on a character 
how competent the user is who has already succumbed 
when casting them. For further to the disease or toxin, a suc- 
details see page 122 of the Folk cessful Healing roll permits the 

Magic chapter. vicim a new chance to resist, 
making it one grade easier. A critical 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

success increases it by two grades. A fumble however, makes the Litreerraacy (IINNT x2) 
resistance roll one grade harder. 

Speaking a language fluently does not mean one can read and 

SuURrGgEeRrYy write it. Literacy is a specific skill, and different cultures and societies 

Surgery is the only way, other than magical healing, that a char- display different levels and approaches towards it. In some, literacy 

acter can recover from a Major Wound. A successful First Aid roll is reserved for the nobility, bureaucratic or religious classes. In others 

is needed to stabilise a Major Wound (see the First Aid skill on page it is unknown with oral traditions prevailing instead. 

41), and then a Healing roll can be made to set a shattered bone, Naturally Literacy is specialised according to its associated lan- 

stitch together the flesh of a stump or excise foreign objects lodged guage, including Native Tongue. Before once can be literate in a 

in tissue, so that the location can begin the road to recovery. Language one must be able to speak it. Literacy cannot exceed the 

As long as the Healing roll is a success, the injured location character’s related Language skill. The skill works similarly to Lan- 

begins to heal as normal for a location suffering a Major Wound (see guage in terms of how much of a document can be comprehended. 

Healing on page 80). On a critical success the location regains 1 Hit Literacy does not necessarily imply writing, as there are an 

Point immediately; whereas on a fumbled Healing roll the patient infinite number of ways to record information. Some cultures might 

must succeed in a Endurance roll or die from the procedure. Surgery carve symbols into trees or lengths of bone, whereas others record 

cannot re-attach a severed limb. history in complex patterns of knots in a tapestry. Neither are all 
forms of literacy based on phonetic alphabets; hieroglyphs and ideo- 

InNvoOCcAaTtIioOnN (IINNT x2) grams also being commonplace. 

Invocation is a magical skill essential to Sorcery. Itis the sorcerer’s 
ability to successfully cast spells learned from a particular grimoire LockkrpiickinNgG (DDEX x2) 
or mentor. It is a combination of understanding the formulae of the Lockpicking is the ability to open a mechanical locking system 

spell, the correct mental state, accompanying gestures and incanta- without the aid of a key or other device made specifically for the 

tions, and so on. Increasing competence in this skill also improves lock. It includes the techniques of levering open bolted or barred 

the final intensity of the spells cast with it. doors and windows without causing damage. The difficulty of the 

Each Invocation skill must be tied to a specific source of sorcer- lock usually depends on the ability of the locksmith who created it, 

ous knowledge, whether that be a particular spellbook, school of requiring an opposed test of Lockpicking versus Mechanisms skill 

wizardry or even a demonic patron. For further details see page 161 of the crafter. 

of the Sorcery chapter. Where no skill value is provided for the lock a Games Master 
may adjust the difficulty grade of the Lockpicking skill instead, 

LaAnNGgUuAaGgEe (IINNTT++CCHA)) according to the lock’s complexity. A thief attempting to pick an 
expensive and expertly crafted mechanical doorlock of a kind he 

This skill covers the speaking and comprehension of languages 
has never seen before, might have to make his Lockpick roll one or 

other than the character’s own. Akin to Native Tongue (see page 
two grades harder, for example. And some locks — invisible, recessed 

42), the Language skill is not rolled against directly, but is treated 
bolts and deadlocks — might be impossible to pick. 

as a static representation of overall fluency. Its value is used by the On a critical success the Lockpicker not only opens the lock silently and effi- 
Games Master to limit the level of spoken interaction when the play- ciently, but subsequent attempt to pick the same kind of lock becomes, for a short 
ers converse with personalities in the game. Use the Linguistic Flu- while, one grade easter. 
ency table as a guideline. A failure simply means the lock could not be picked. 

On a_fumble the lock becomes jammed: lockpicks break in the mechanism, or 
LinNngGuistTic FlLuUeEnNCcYy 

the mechanism s damaged internally. Whatever the cause, the jammed lock wall 
Language % Conversational Fluency 

ultimately attract attention. 
01-25% Knows only a few simple words, cannot phrase sentences 

26-50% Can understand and communicate in fragmentary, simple 
- 0 Lore (IINNT x2) 

sentences, such as “Where temple?” or “How much food? 
Lore covers a specific body of knowledge which must be chosen 

51-75% Fluent enough for general conversation 
when the skill is first learned. Astrology, Astronomy, Geography, His- 

Able to express yourself with eloquence 
76% + tory, Monsters, Mythology, Politics, Strategy and Tactics: these are 

all typical examples of Lore skills. Skill in a Lore means the charac- 
ter understands its fundamentals, how it can be applied to immedi- 

Each Language skill is specific to a particular national or regional 
ate challenges and problems, and can use the Lore to recall useful 

language which must be chosen at the time of learning. It can help to 
information. 

understand similar dialects which share a common linguistic basis or 
A eritical Lore success grants a high degree of insight into what is being 

origin. Depending on the divergence, the skill roll should be treated 
studied. It also means that a subsequent skill roll relevant to that Lore becomes one 

at least one grade harder, possibly reducing the character’s fluency. 
grade easier. For example, a commanding officer who critically succeeds in a Lore 

Language is also used as a cap on verbal skills which require a 
(Politics) roll knows that not only 1s the approaching troupe part of a diplomatic 

good grasp of language. See Capping Skills on page 50. 
envoy, but they are mercenaries unhappy with their situation. If he later tries to 
influence the mercenaries to change sides his roll would become one step easter. 

Failing a Lore roll results in no useful information being gained. 

47



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

A fumbled Lore roll indicates a complete misunderstanding of the subject. A critical success indicates the musician creates music of stunning quality, 
Facts are wrong, and subsequent skill rolls dependent on the Lore skill’s accuracy elegance or beauty. Any subsequent skill rolls, such as Influence, become one grade 
become one grade more difficult. easter. 

Failing a Musicianship roll renders in a lacklustre performance. A _fumbled 

MEechHAaNnIisSmMSs (DDEX+INT)) Muswianship roll resulls in a musical disaster. Perhaps the instrument breaks 
or the prece of music performed is taken as a gross insull. The effects of such a 

Mechanisms represents the knowledge and skill to assemble and 
lerrible situation need to be determined by the Games Master but, at the very least, 

disassemble mechanical devices, such as traps. The skill of Mecha- 
represent embarrassment that could influence reputation. 

nisms generally involves the creation of delicate contraptions with 
small working parts, as opposed to Engineering, which deals with 
massive constructions. It is a distinct discipline from Lockpicking MyyssTtiicismm (PPOOWW+CON)) 
and cannot be interchanged with that skill. Mysticism is a magical skill essential to Mystics. It measures their 

The time taken to deal with a mechanism depends entirely on facility to perform superhuman acts through the channelling of 
its scale and complexity. Repairing a large cartwheel might take inner resources, and either harnessing or suppressing certain pas- 
half an hour; whilst building a poison-needle trapped lock might sions or concepts. As competence in this skill improves, so does the 
take an entire week. When deciding on how long a Mechanism skill mystic gradually approach perfection in those skills which are the 
attempt should take, Games Masters need to consider the size, intri- focus of his training. 
cacy, tools needed, and any specific conditions. As a rule of thumb, Each Mysticism skill must be tied to a specific foundation of 
Mechanisms rolls take a minimum of 1d3x10 minutes but this is for mystical knowledge. This can be a religious sect, a book of esoteric 
simplest and most straightforward of mechanical challenges. The teachings or perhaps a mountain-top residing hermit. The skill is 
timeframe may very well extend to months. more fully described in the Mysticism chapter on page 155. 

On a critical success the character achieves success i half the usual time, 
and withf lawless results. Any future rolls attempting lo disable or circumvent the NAaVvIiGgAaTtIioOnN (IINNTT++PPOOW)) 
Mechanisms are one grade harder. 

Whether using prominent landmarks, the stars or the varying 
A falure resulls in a device which is temperamental and prone to breaking 

taste of seawater, the ability to accurately direct travel is covered by 
down; attempts to bypass or render it inoperative are one grade easier. 

the Navigation skill. Each Navigation skill covers a specific region 
On afumble the mechanism is utterly broken, and has to be thrown away and 

or environment, such as Open Seas or Underground for example. 
started againfrom scratch. 

It should be made during unusual journeys or when in completely 
unfamiliar territory. 

MEeDdIitTaAtTiIoOnN (IINNTT++CCOON)) A critical success in Navigation allows the user to locate a shorteut, such as 
Meditation is the ability to reach a state of deep relaxation and a fast current or hidden pass. 

concentration, through emptying the consciousness of all distrac- Failing the roll results in delays due to uncertainty or temporarily losing the 
tions: external and internal. Technically a magical skill, it is a fun- path. 
damental part of Mysticism controlling the depth of focus needed A fumbled Navigation ends up with the user becoming utterly lost, unable to 
when augmenting skills to superhuman levels. As competence in even backtrack. 
Meditation improves, the more potent a mystic’s abilities become. 

Being a useful skill, Meditation need not be limited to just mys- ORrAaTtOoRrYy (PPOOWW+CHAA)) 
tics. Since it helps to shut out distractions and relaxes the body, it 

Oratory is the art of delivering a speech to large group of people 
allows the user to achieve rest even in the most uncomfortable of 

with the aim of conveying or swaying a point of view. It is a skill 
locations. A successful roll permits a character to recover Fatigue or 

frequently used by politicians to drive home a policy, but is also used 
Hit Points in situations normally forbidden by the rules. 

by commanders to inspire troops, and impose discipline on the bat- 
tlefield. Wherever mass persuasion is needed, Oratory, rather than 

MuusisicciiaNnssHhIiPp (DDEX+CHA)) Influence, is used. 
Musicianship covers the playing of musical instruments; from a On a critical Oratory roll the orator sways the group completely to his argu- 

simple reed pipe to a complex stringed instrument such as a harp. ment, even winning over the most ardent of detractors. Subsequent rolls related to 
Each iteration of Musicianship is applied to a group of similar the Oratory are one difficulty grade easer. 
instruments. A musician who can play a reed pipe can also play a A failed Oratory roll goes nowhere; people are as dispassionate or hostile as 
flute, panpipes or a recorder because the fundamentals are the same. before. 
He could not, however, play a harp or lute. On a_fumble, the orator has alienated his audience, perhaps made himself 

The chief groups of instruments are: look foolish, and may even have managed to compel the audience to believe the 
opposite of what he wanted to convey. Subsequent rolls dependent on the Oratory 

& Bow Strings (violin, cello, fiddle, and so on) 
become one grade harder. 

« Keyboards (piano, organ, clavinet, and so on) 
& Percussion (drums, tom-toms, and so on) 
& Plucked Strings (harp, lyre) SeEaAmMAaNnSsHhIiPp (IINNTT++CCOON)) 
& Strummed Strings (lute, guitar, banjo etc) This skill is used in exactly the same way as Boating (see page 39) 

& Wind (pipe, flute, trumpet, and so on) but is instead applied to large waterborne vessels powered by sail or 
banks of oars. It also covers the maintenance and upkeep of a ship: 

48



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

assessing when repairs are needed, where it is safe to anchor, the Failing a Streetwise attempt merely results in wasting the time spent looking. 
dangers of violent weather, and so forth. A fumbled Streetwise means the character not only fauls to find what is being 

sought, but also comes under unwanted, potentially dangerous attention: from 

SedpucTtionN (IINNTT++CCHA)) local thugs or muggers to the resident militia, depending on curcumstances. 

Seduction is the romantic or sexual persuasion of another per- 
son, a skill very different to Influence. It uses explicit signals — verbal SurviivaLl (CCOON+POW)) 
and non-verbal — to elicit a sexually positive response. It also takes This skill covers surviving in a rural or wilderness environment 
a significant amount of time: successful Seduction may take hours, where the benefits of civilisation are absent: foraging, building a fire, 
days or weeks to achieve depending on the morals of the target, finding shelter or a safe place to sleep. When properly equipped rolls 
who always has the opportunity to resist a Seduction attempt with are usually unnecessary since the character may be carrying a tent, 
Willpower. food supplies, and so on. Only when separated from their equip- 

A critical Seduction rollyields a potent result, entrancing the victim or causing ment or when environmental conditions turn bad does it become 
them to_fall passionately in love (or lust). Subsequent skill rolls taking advantage essential to utilise this skill. A roll is usually made once per day in 
of this relationshup become one grade easier. such conditions. 

A failed Seduction leads to the seducer being rebuffed to some degree. A critical success indicates that the character locates a good source of food or 
A fumble ends up causing emotional hurt or insulting the target. This com- shelter, and does not need to make a_further Survwal rollfor a number of days 

Dletely ruins any further chances of seduction for the time being; it also makes equal to the critical range of his skill (one-tenth). 
subsequent skill rolls one grade harder. A disastrous Seduction attempt can lead to Farlure results in the character gaining an automatic level off atigue that does 
intensely grave consequences. not lift until conditions change or the next Survival roll is made. A_fumbled Sur- 

vwal roll ends up with a disastrous accident of some kind; encountering a_fierce 

ShHAaPpIinNgG (IINNTT++PPOOW)) creature, suffering exposure or consuming poisonous. food_for example. 

Shaping is a magical skill that is the counterpart to Invocation. 
Successfully invoked spells can be manipulated or shaped by the sor- TeachH (IINNTT++CCHA)) 
cerer to meet specific requirements; extending their range, adding Teach allows the user to pass on their knowledge and techniques 
multiple targets, increasing duration, and so on. The Sorcery chap- in an easy to understand and constructive manner. Without this skill 
ter on page 161-162 defines how Shaping works in detail. even the most capable of masters will suffer problems instructing 

others. Similarly to certain other skills, Teach is not rolled against 

SLleEiIgGhHTt (DDEX+CHA)) directly, but acts as a limit to what actually can be taught to more 
advanced students. For further details see Training on page 73. 

Sleight covers attempts to palm or conceal small objects (leger- 
demain and prestidigitation), and includes attempts to pick pockets, 
cut purses or cause a visual distraction. Naturally it is an essential GEeNnEeRrAaLl VvSs.. SPpEeCcIiFfIicC TEeaAcChHIinNgG 
thieves’ skill. Depending on the amount of complexity Games Masters wish to intro- 

Characters can attempt to manipulate any item as long as it is due, teachers may specialise in a particular area or range of subjects. 

no larger than their hand. Sleight can be attempted with living crea- For example, Kara’s philosophy teacher specialises in Teach (Meerish 
tures provided that the user has somewhere or something to conceal Philosophy). This covers the teachings of the great Meerish philosophers, 

them with, a hat or baggy sleeve for example, but the skill becomes lastorians, and cult prests. 

one grade harder to perform. Some objects, due to their size and 1If treated in this way Teach can_function almost as a Combat Style, 

mass cannot be manipulated with Sleight at all but require Con- encompassing several different skills or areas of study. A thieves’ cult might 

ceal instead. Observers can pit their Perception skill against Sleight employ teachers who wnstruct in the related arts of Disguise, Stealth, and 

attempts to become aware of the deception. Sleight, under the Teach (The Hidden Path) skill. 

On a critical Sleight success the character has manipulated the object so suc- Culls frequently employ teachers who train therr members in specific 

cessfully that any subsequent attempts to locate it are one grade harder: cult skills (see page 199 of the Cults and Brotherhoods chapter). 
N f 

Failure means that the object ts not concealed, and will be automatically 
detected 1f any effort 1s made to locate ut. 

If fumbled, not only is the item unconcealed, but it is dropped or otherwise 
Jully exposed at a most inopportune moment. 

TrRaAcCkK (IINNTT++CCOON)) 
STtRreeTtwIiSsEe (PPOOWW+CHAA)) The Track skill is used for tracking any form of game or quarry. 

Streetwise represents knowledge of places and social contacts It uses both obvious and ambiguous signs of passing to remain on 
within a settlement. It covers everything from identifying potentially the quarry’s trail, including footprints, bruised leaves, scattered pol- 
dangerous neighbourhoods, to finding local services — legal or ille- len, displaced rocks, and so on; small, tell-tale signs that are invisible 
gal. How long a Streetwise attempt takes depends on what is sought. to the non-skilled. Track rolls need to be made periodically, espe- 
Finding a good inn will take less time than locating a fence for stolen cially if conditions change abruptly (a rain shower, for example, 
goods or a fake trading permit. will disturb certain signs). How often depends on how cunning the 

A critical Streetwise success locates the precise person or place necessary to quarry has been. Conceal rolls can be used to oppose a Track roll. 
gain what he is seeking for, without unnecessary bribes or intermediary steps, 
which can result in theformation of a new contact. 

49



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

With a critical success the tracker remains on the trail of someone or some- unaugmented; so Anathaym would still only score a Critical 
thing not attempting to hide their spooy; wrrespectwe of conditions, and does not success on a roll of 4% or less. 
need to make any subsequent Track rolls to locate the quarry. & Characters can augment other character’s skills to assist them. 

Failing causes the tracker to lose the trail, forcing them to backtrack in order All the above rules apply, so a character being aided cannot 
to pick it up again. augment himself in addition. Likewise a character can only 

Fumbling a Track roll loses the trail utterly, forcing the user to abandon the contribute one of his skills to assist another. So, for example, 
pursuat or hunt. Alternately the tracker may wander blithely into a prepared trap Anathaym, trying to scale a high wall, could have her Athlet- 
laid by the stalked victim. ics skill augmented by a companion’s Brawn (representing a 

hitch-up). 

TRrAaNnCcEe (PPOOWW+CON)) 
Trance is a magical skill used by practitioners of Animism to CAaPpPpIinNgG SKkIiLlLlSs 

attain the correct psychological state that permits the perception of, 
To ‘cap’ a skill with another means that for a particular roll, the 

and transition into, the Spirit World. Further detail on how Trance 
primary skill is restricted to the value of a secondary skill, providing 

works 1§ given in the Animism chapter beginning on page 130. 
the latter is lower. This is normally done in situations where a char- 
acter’s full knowledge or ability is limited by unusual circumstances. 

Capping is a useful alternative to applying a difficulty modifier, 

DIiFfFfeErReEnNTt SIitTuUaAtTiIoOnNSs especially in circumstances where the character is limited by their 

Although the basic rules for using skills in MYTHRAS are very own capability. 

straightforward, there are a multitude of different circumstances 
that arise during play that require skills to be handled in a slightly ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
different way. The following sections look at these circumstances and Anathaym has a Lore (Strategy, and Tactics) skill of 48% which she 

situations, and show how to handle them. normally rolls without penally when organising battle plans with her native 
Meerish compatriots. Travelling across the plains of Korath however she us 

REeAaTtTtEemMPpTtIinNgG SKkIiLlLlSs Jorced to use the local language with her hired nomadic bodyguards, in which 
she if ar lessfluent, knowing only afew basic words — Language (Korathian) 

In some situations a character will fail a skill attempt but be left 
23%. Spotting an approaching enemy patrol of Zingriffi raiders, Anathaym 

in a situation where he could potentially try again. Example cases 
attempls lo organise her nomads to lay an ambush. In this circumstance the 

might be picking a lock or attempting to climb a sheer wall. Instead 
Games Master rules that her halting command of the local language will 

of simply denying any further attempts, kindly Games Masters may 
prevent Anathaym from being able to clearly explain her plan; capping her 

permit a follow-up, last-ditch attempt. However, the character will 
Lore (Strategy, and ‘Tactics) skill to the value of her Language (Korathian). 

suffer some trepidation or lack of confidence which increases the 
difficulty of the skill roll by one grade. 

If this second effort also ends in failure, the character is assumed 
to have given it his ‘best shot’, and cannot make any further attempts 
for the foreseeable future. COoNnTtEeSsTtEedD ROoLlLlSs 

Contested Rolls are used whenever a skill is actively resisted by 
AUuGgMmEeNnTtIinNGg SKkIiLlLlSs an opponent. This can be anything from a character influencing a 

It is possible for one skill to aid another. This is called Augmenting. reticent guard to a sorcerer casting a spell against a monster. There 
Anathaym, for example, may find herself being chased by nomad are two types of contest: Opposed Rolls and Dfferential Rolls. 
raiders through countryside she knows well, and they do not. She 
could, in this case, augment her Drive with her Locale skill, knowl- OppproOsedD RoolLlLls 
edge of the local terrain giving her an advantage. MyTHRAS frequently pits one skill against another — Stealth ver- 

The Games Master will decide if augmentation is appropri- sus Perception when a thief attempts to cut a nobleman’s purse, 

ate and possible. Any skill being used to augment another must be say; or Deceit versus Insight when the same thief tries to deny the 

appropriate to the circumstances. In Anathaym’s example Locale attempt when he is caught —are good examples of times where skills 

is appropriate because she knows the area. If she was in unfamiliar are matched against each other. These are known as Opposed Rolls, 

territory it would not be permissible. and are used where a challenge will result in either win or lose, pass 
or fail. 

& Characters can only augment the primary skill with a single An Opposed Roll is determined thus: both participants roll their 
other skill. respective skills. The winner is the one who gains the better level of 

& An augmenting skill increases the value of the primary skill success. If the participants score the same level of success (a stan- 
by twice its Critical range (ie, 20% of the skill). So, in Ana- dard success each, or a critical each), then the winner is the one who 
thaym’s case, using Locale 33% she would increase her Ride has the highest dice roll still within the success range of the skill. 
by 7%, giving her a Ride of 45%. However, the chances for For example, Lodz, a thief of Meeros, attempts to cut the purse of Senator 
Ciritical and Fumble are the same as if the primary skill was Odas. Tlus calls for a Sleight roll by Lodz which, the Games Master says, will 

be opposed by Odas’ Perception. The dice are rolled: Lodz scores 45 on his 
Sleght skill of 70%, and Odas scores 63 on hus Perception of 66%. Both have 

50



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

succeeded in their rolls but, because Odas has rolled higher than Lodz, and is still DIiFfFfEeRrEeNnTtIiaALl ROoLlLlSs 
within hus skill range, he isjudged the winner. Lodz has successfully cut the purse, Differential rolls are similar to Opposed rolls except that instead 
but Odas has quite clearly seen him do 1. of a simple win or lose result, the difference in levels of success are 

In a bid to save his skin, Lodz attempts to ke his way out of trouble. “The calculated. Primarily used for the resolution of combat (see page 
cord snapped, sir”” Lodz protests. I merely caughtyour purse as it dropped, and 94), Differential Rolls can also be used in other situations where the 
was about lo return it to_you.” This calls for a Decet rollfor Lodz, opposed by Games Master wishes to increase the detailed results of a contest. 
Odas’ Insight roll. Lodz has Deceit 78%, and rolls 07 — a critical success. Odas A Differential Roll is determined in the following manner: Both 
has Insight 64%, and rolls 62. Here, Lodz quite clearly has the better level of participants roll against their respective skills and suffer the results of 
success: a critical against Odas’ standard success. Lodz manages to sweet-talk their roll as if tested in isolation. There is no outright ‘winner’ per se, 
has way out of a sticky situation, and he walks away thankful, but ruing his bad but whoever gained the higher level of success gains an advantage 
luck at so nearly being caught. equal to the difference in the success levels between them (assuming 

one participant gains at least a standard success or better). If both 
If both participants fail in an Opposed Roll then either: participants score the same level of success (a standard success each, 

or a critical each), then there is no additional effect. 
& Describe the situation, leaving both sides hanging in dramatic 

tension, then re-roll the contest to establish a winner DiirfrfFerReenNtTiIaAlL ROoLlLl REeSsUuLlTtSs 
& The Games Master should produce some explanation or cir- 

cumstances that suit the nature of the failure Result of  Antagonist Antagonist Antagonist Antagonist 
Rolls Critical Success Failure Fumble 

In the Lodz and Odas example, both of them failing in the initial 
rolls would mean that Lodz failed to cut the purse, and Odas failed Protagonist B 2 o ‘ 

Cre[flgolnlx No Benefit Wins 1 level of ~ Wins 2 levels of  Wins 3 levels of 
to notice him trying: it is easy to re-roll the contest. In the case of e Success Success Success 

Lodz trying to lie his way out of trouble, if both fail in their rolls 
Protagonist Antagonist Wi i " 

then the Games Master informs the players that both of them are . i No Benefit Wins 1 level of  Wins 2 levels of 
Success 1 level of Success 

suddenly distracted by the sounds of a skirmish across the market- Success Success 

place as a brawl breaks-out between rival merchants. Lodz can make R Antagonist Antagonist 
Protagonist . . 

a swift exit, and Odas has his attention absorbed by the merchants’ il Wins 2 levels of ~ Wins 1 level of No Benefit No Benefit 

squabble. e Success Success 

Opposed rolls are frequently used in certain battle situations to P I 1 t . : 
F"’ a}f; - Wins 3 levels of ~ Wins 2 levels — No Bengfit No Bengfit 

overcome the effects of wounds or oppose a combat special effect. 
e Success of Success 

They are also used to resist poisons and disease, or shrug off the 
effects of baleful magic. 

OpppPoOSseEdD SkiiLlLls OVvEeRr 100% 
OvprpPoOsedD RooOLlLl EXxAaMmPpLlEeSs If the highest skilled participant in an Opposed or Differential 
Activity Opposing Skill Examples Roll has a skill in excess of 100%, that participant subtracts the dif- 
Bargaining/Haggling ~ Commerce vs Commerce, Influence vs Commerce ference between 100, and his skill value from the skill of everyone 

Chasing/Racing Athletics vs Athletics, Athletics vs Endurance, Ride vs Ride in the contest, including himself. This reduces the skill value of the 

Deceiving or Lying Deceit vs Insight, Sleight vs Perception opponents but leaves him retaining the advantage. 
The identification of who has the highest skill must be calculated 

Displaying Loyalty Passion vs Passion, Passion vs Insight, Passion vs Influence 
after any other modifiers for circumstances have been applied. 

Getting out of the Evade vs Athletics, Evade vs Mechanisms, Evade vs Ride 

Way 

Hiding or Sneaking Stealth vs Perception; Stealth vs Track Grourp RoollLls 
Pulling Rank Influence vs Willpower, Deceit vs Willpower Group Rolls are a time-saving way for Games Masters to deter- 

Staying the Course Endurance vs Endurance, Endurance vs Brawn mine the success of a group of individuals involved in the same task. 
There are two separate forms of Group Roll: Team Rolls and Sorting 

Swaying a Crowd Oratory vs Willpower 
Rolls. 

Test of Strength Brawn vs Brawn, Brawn vs Endurance 

Test of Wills Willpower vs Willpower, Seduction vs Willpower 

SIimMPpLlIifFyYiInNgG SuUBbTtRrAaCcTtIioOnN 
wWIitThH  SKkIiLlLlSs oOVvEeRr 100% 

Games Masters may find ad hoc subtraction for skills over 100% 
slows down theflow of their game. As an allernative suggestion, penalties 
should be rounded up to the nearest 10%. Thus in a conlest involving 
a skl of say 115%, instead of subtracting 13% from everybody in 
the contest, the Games Master can simply round the penalty up to 20% 

Nw huch is a faster calculation. r 

ol



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

Team RollLl Games Masters need to judge when to use multiple rolls to a 

In a team test, success 1s co-operative; everyone reaps the ben- group roll. Multiple rolls — one roll for each individual in a group - 

efit from a single success. If the group of bandits hunting Ana- is more realistic, but is time consuming. If it is important to keep a 

thaym are all trying to search for her hiding place in the forest, then game flowing and individual skill successes are not so important, a 

any successful Perception roll will reveal her to all the bandits. The Group Roll is more effective. 

Games Master rolls once for the highest skill in the team (the highest 
PRrOoPpOoRrTtIioOnNAaLl SKkIiLlLl SUuCcCcEeSsSs 

Perception skill among the bandits, for example), and if the roll is 
Occasionally it may be necessary to determine the success of 

a success, everybody in the team succeeds. If the roll is a failure, 
a large group of people performing the same task, in a situation 

everybody fails. 
in which there is no margin for error. In this case, simply take the 

A ‘reverse’ team test can be used in a situation where one failure 
skill being used and apply that as the percentage of success for the 

can spell disaster. For example, if a group of hunters are attempting 
whole group. 

to stalk a deer, any failed Stealth test will startle the quarry. In this 
For example: a group of 100 troops are attempting to wade across a 

case, the hunter with the lowest Stealth skill rolls a Stealth test. If he 
Jast-flowing river a short distance from a high and treacherous waterfall. Thus 

succeeds, everyone succeeds. If the roll is a failure, everybody fails. 
calls for an Athletics skill test. A faled skill test for an individual would result 

SoORrTtIinNgG RoLlLl in thewr being swept away by the current. Rather than rolling 100 skill tests, 

In a sorting test, success is individual. For or using a Group Roll to determine 

example, the same group of bandits are being whether all 100 soldiers make it 

chased by Anathaym, which calls for opposed across, the Games Master can sim- 

Ride tests. Some of the bandits have a Ride Dby rule that the Athletics skillfor the 

skill of 40%, some of 50%, and some of 60%. group represents what proportion of 

The Games Master makes a group roll for the that group successfully completes the 

bandits, which results in a 49. Those with skills task. If the troops have an Athletics 

of 50% or more succeed, while the slower ban- skl of 75, then 75 of them will 

dits - those on a skill of 49 or lower - begin to make 1t to the other side of the rwer, 

fall behind (unless the remainder of the bandits and the remaining 25 will be swept 

slow their progress to allow their fellows to keep away. 

up). 

52



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SKkIiLlLlSs 

SKkIiLlLlSs SuUMmMmAaRrIiEeSs 

StTaAnNdDAaRrdD SKkIiLlLlSs 
All - Combat  Styles  are Skill Basic Percentage Skill Basic Percentage 

SIR+DEX Athletics STR+DEX Influence CHAx2 

Boating STR+CON Insight INT+POW 

Brawn STR+SIZ Locale INT x2 

Conceal DEX+POW Native Tongue INT+CHA 

Customs INTx2 Perception INT+POW 

Dance DEX+CHA Ride DEX+POW 

Deceit INT+CHA Sing CHA+POW 

Il IDIO3SHROMY Stealth DEX+INT 
Endurance CON x2 Swim STR+CON 

Evade DEX x2 Unarmed STR+DEX 

First Aid INT+DEX Willpower POW x2 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsiIoOnNAaLl SKkIiLlLlSs 
Skills in wtalics are used Skill Basic Percentage Skill Basic Percentage 

wm Mage. Acting CHA x2 Literacy INT x2 

L Lo Acrobatics STR+DEX Lockpicking DEX x2 
Animism: Binding, and 
Trance Art POW+CHA Lore INT x2 

Binding POW+CHA Mechanisms DEX+INT 

Mpysticism: Meditation Bureaucracy INT x2 Meditation INT+CON 

and Mysticism Commerce INT+CHA Musicianship DEX+CHA 

Courtesy INT+CHA Mpysticism POW+CON 

Theism: Devotion and Craft DEX+INT Navigation INT+POW 

Exhort Culture INT x2 Oratory POW-+CHA 
Devotion POW+CHA Seamanship INT+CON 

Somer.y: Traocation and Disguise INT+CHA Seduction INT+CHA 
Shaping Engineering INT x2 Shaping INT+POW 

Exhort INT+CHA Sleight DEX+CHA 

Folk Magic POW+CHA Streetwise POW+CHA 

Gambling INT+POW Survival CON+POW 

Healing INT+POW Teach INT+CHA 

Tnvocation INT x2 Track INT+CON 

Language INT+CHA Trance POW+CON 

PAaSssIioOnNSs 

A person, in a romantic or familial context 30% plus Loved one’s POW+CHA 

A person in a platonic context (a friendship or loyalty, ~ 30% plus Character’s POW, and subject’s CHA 
for example) 

A person in an averse context 30% plus Character’s POW, and subject’s CHA 

An organisation or group of people 30% plus Character’s POW+INT 

A race or species 30% plus Character’s POW x 2 

A place 30% plus Character’s POW+INT 

An object or substance 30% plus Character’s POW x 2 

A concept or ideal 30% plus Character’s POW+INT 

53



Mythras:  Economics & Equipment

o — 
= YY % &W T S LU SO GO << A o IR UL AR | < < 

Economics & 

Equipment
o — 

T= Y5Y  X 2 M oK &ow i S LU SO GO << A o IR UL AR | < < 

his chapter is concerned with money: how much characters 
have, and what it buys. MYTHRAS uses the Silver Piece (SP) as InNcCoOMmEe,, LIivViInNgG 

T the standard unit of currency in the game, with the cost of 
most equipment, goods and services being measured in SP. One Sil- StTaAnNdDAaRrDdSs AanNDd CLlAaSsSs 
ver Piece is the standard price for one day’s food, drink, and accom- A character’s income is a reflection of how much he makes in 

modation for one person, of stark quality; that is to say, breakfast a given period of time. Whilst income equates to wealth, it is most 

and an evening meal, with some form of cheap beverage, and a common for average workers to generate income not in terms of 

place to sleep for the night. coin, but in terms of food and shelter, or access to land which, if 

It therefore costs a character around 7 SP a week personally to tended, annually generates an amount per year equivalent to their 

live at subsistence level. Depending on where the characters are yearly income in terms of coinage. Other common forms of rec- 

located, coinage may not even be used (or may be viewed with suspi- ompense include training — magical and mundane — favours, and 

cion). Some cultures value barter and payment in kind more favour- trade in kind. 

ably than the chink of silver. Civilised cultures are most likely to use coinage for income and 

Other coins are available as well. The standard currency for expenditure — although only those social classes with any form of 

MyTHRAS consists of the Copper Piece, Silver Piece and Gold Piece. prosperity will use coins on a frequent basis. Lowly classes will rely 

The exchange rate is: on barter, favours, and payments-in-kind for most transactions, with 
coins being a rare and treasured luxury. 

& 10 Coppers = 1 Silver An individual’s standard of living is determined by their total 
& 100 Silvers = 1 Gold expenditure each year on essentials: food, drink, lodging, clothes, 

Thus a single Gold Piece would provide a MYTHRAS character gifts, and so on. It is natural for most people to spend nearly all their 

with reasonable food for 100 days. Three or four Gold Pieces would income achieving, or maintaining, the highest possible standard of 

see a character roughly all the way through the year, if he is frugal. living that they can. Note that this income may be required to sup- 

Some cultures, typically farming, nomad and barbarian commu- port any additional dependents they may have, such as children, 

nities, measure wealth in terms of livestock. A single large herd ani- household servants or perhaps even a troop of personal guards. 

mal, such as a cow, is worth around 100 SP. A pig or sheep is worth Those who spend more are likely to be at the top of their social 

around 25 SP, and a flock of hens around 15 SP. class; those who are frugal and pinch pennies can exist on about 
25% less than the amounts listed in the Social Class table, and will 
save some of their income, but may show a lower standard of living 
for their class. 

Anyone seeking to be socially mobile must increase their living 
ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA expenditures accordingly. Note, though, that social rank often does 

As MrTHRAS is not setting-spectfic the names of coins are very generic, but not rely on comparatively equal incomes. A barbarian chieftain may 
Games Masters should create something evocativefor their coinage. very well be accorded more respect, and wield more power, than a 

Silvers could, for example, be shillings, royals, pounds, and so on. Coppers civilised rich noble, yet have nowhere near the same income in terms 
could be penmes, bits orf arthings. Gold could be wheels, Imperials or some- of cash and value in property. 
thing equally grandiloquent. The Minimum Maintenance Costs table opposite compares the 

In Meeros the copper prece is known as an Obol, the silver as a Drachm, minimum required expenditures required over time to maintain the 
and a gold a Zarig. standard of living for that social class. It does not necessarily indicate 

54

L 
hL4 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcCoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 

the actual amount a member of that social class earns, which can be 
higher, but it can be used as a basis for deciding how much money 
a particular social class may have available in ready coin or other 
commodities. 

Social SP per SP per SP per . 
Typical Home 

Class Day Week Year* 

Exile Lives a hand to mouth existence None/Lives Rough 

Slave 1 7 370, Shared Shack/Hut 

Hut/Cabin/ 
Freeman 2 15 750 

Rented Room 

Gentry 10 75 3,750 House/Apartment 

. Large Villa/ 
Aristocracy 50 350 20,000 . 

Mansion 

Ruling 250 1,750 100,000 Palaces/Estates 

*Depends on the campaign setting Assumes a year length of roughly 360 days with 

totals rounded up for neatness 

CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr InNcCoOmMEe 

BEetTwWEeEenN ADdVvEeNnTtUuRrIinNGg 
Characters are unlikely to spend all their time adventuring and, 

between adventures, will be engaged in professional and cultural means in order lo prevent himself dropping a social class, perhaps being forced 
pursuits. Characters can therefore expect some form of income into servitude as a slave to pay off lus debls. 
from ‘normal’ day to day business according to their social class. Characters can expect to spend the income indicated in the 

Tor example a noble might earn a regular income from taxing Minimum Maintenance Costs table on general living expenses. Of 
the inhabitants of his lands, or receive a stipend from his father, course, they can squander any windfall or spend less if prepared 
requiring no direct involvement on his part; whereas a baker might potentially to drop their living standards, albeit at the risk of their 
be employed slavishly baking loaves every day. reputation suffering in some form. 
A character can expect to earn an applicable SP amount for his 

profession and social class. This assumes all is well in the world and 
no disasters, natural or otherwise, have affected the ability to gen- 
erate income. However, if a more accurate reflection of downtime BAaRrTtEeRrIinNgG aAnNDd 
income is needed, roll on the Seasonal Income table adjusting the 
1d100 roll as follows: HAaGgGgLlIinNGg 

In most societies shopping for services or goods is rarely straight- 

SeEaAsSoOnNAaLl InNcCoOmMEe TAaBbLlEe forward. Coinage tends to be confined to civilised cultures, but in 

1d100 Profitability primitive, barbarian and nomad cultures, barter is far more com- 
mon. Even where currency is actually used, traders rarely sell any- 

01-10 Disastrous: Reduce Income by 50% 
thing for a ‘standard’ price, as the value of most objects is subjective, 

11-20 Poor: Reduce Income by 25% 
and most purchases are haggled over. 

21-60 Normal: No adjustment to Income 
As was once wisely said, an item is only as valuable as the amount 

61-80 Prosperous: Increase Income by 25% 
somebody will pay for it. 

81-00 Very Prosperous: Increase Income by 50% 

The table represents the downtime profitability during the length BAaRrTtEeRrIinNgG 
of time the character was working or supervising his holdings, any- Bartering successfully depends on tendering something someone 

thing from several days to a year. During this period any number of else needs in exchange for what is being offered. A civilised character 

things may have occurred from the failure of a harvest or theft of his in a barbarian stead might offer coins in exchange for food, but coin- 

property, through to an unexpected demand for particular produce age does not necessarily offer any immediate advantage to the bar- 

or the expansion of a business. barian. To barter successfully then, the character must have some- 

For example, a self-employed Baker (a_freeman) might expect to earn 30 SP thing the other party finds valuable in their normal environment. 

in a week under normal circumstances. The 1d100 result is 06. One winter s Trading in kind usually works well: offering to chop wood for a 

especially bad, and the price of grain is driven up due to shortages, forcing the morning in exchange for a bowl of stew and a bed for the night, for 

baker to absorb the majority of the loss in order to keep his customers. The baker example. More complex or specialised goods and services are less 

only earns 50% of hus usual Seasonal amount, for a total of 15 SE which likely to succeed — unless the character can convince the other party 

Jortunately is just enough to keep supporting lisf amaly, and business. If his basic of the need and utility. 

income had been less then he might have had to sell his bakery or resort to illicit 

5o



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcCoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA Influence or Commerce against Willpower or Commerce. The out- 

Anathaym decides she wishes to purchase a new sword. Venturing to the come of the roll is determined by the difference in success levels 

bronzesmuth’s quarter in Meeros, she spots an intriguing blade suited to her between buyer and seller: 

lastes, and begins to bargain with the seller. The Games Master decides to 
HAaGgGgLlIinNgG OuuTtCcoOMmEe TAaBbLlEe 

use the Haggling rules which requare resolution based on a differential roll. 
Anathaym has an Influence skill of 28% which the merchant opposes with Difference in Levels of Purchaser gains 

s Advantage Seller gains Advantage 

his Commerce skill of 63 %. 
The dice are rolled. Whilst Anathaym manages to succeed in her Influence 5 25% of the Standard 200% of the Standard 

10ll, the merchant Criticals his, resulting in the seller winning by one level of Price Price 

success. According to the Haggling Outcome Table this means that although 50% of the Standard 150% of the Standard 

Anathaym negotiates well, the merchant’s impressive sales pitch convinces her : Price Price 

lo pay a quarter over the normal pricefor such a weapon. Anathaym considers | 75% of the Standard 125% of the Standard 

herself fortunate however, if she hadf ailed the roll the merchant would have Price Price 

won by two levels of success, which would have been even more expensive! Equal Standard Price Standard Price 

Bartering works in the following way: 

& The character makes an offer of something. If this is a com- 
mon commodity or an essential service appropriate to the EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 
other party that is obviously going to be of benefit, then the The remainder of this chapter is given over to equipment: 

barter succeeds. armour, weapons, clothing, tools and other sundries characters rely 

If the character is intending to offer something of less obvi- on when adventuring. 

ous value/utility or something esoteric, then he makes a Cus- Any piece of equipment is described in terms of one or more 

toms or relevant Culture roll. If successful, he has spotted a elements (some apply more than others). These are: 

way of pointing out benefits not realised by the other party. & Cost (in SP or CP) 
This changes the difficulty grade of either Influence or Com- 

& Armour Points: the natural resilience of the item to damage 
merce, whichever is being used to effect the transaction. 

& Hit Points: how much damage the item can sustain before 
being destroyed or rendered useless 

BAaRrTtEerR MOoDIdFifIiEeRr TAaBbLlEe & Encumbrance: how much the item contributes to Encum- 

Customs/Culture Influence Bonus Commerce Bonus brance (see page 77) limits; a combined measure of weight, 

Ciritical Easy Very Easy mass, and restriction 

Success Standard Easy Some items, typically clothing, and very small, light things, have 
TFailure Hard Standard only cost listed: it can be assumed that such things do not contrib- 
Fumble Formidable Hard ute towards Encumbrance limits and can be damaged relatively 

casily. Others, such as weapons, armour, and tools, display all four 

& Next the character makes an Opposed Influence or Com- elements. 

merce roll. The other party resists with either Willpower or 
Commerce - whichever is higher. EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt PRrIicCEe 

& If the character wins the Opposed roll, what he offers is 
All items listed in this chapter represent standard quality exam- 

accepted. If he fails, it is not. If the Adventurer fumbles the 
ples. Items of better or worse quality are available at an either an 

opposed roll, then there is a good chance he has insulted the 
inflated or reduced cost. The section on Equipment Quality, starting 

other party, meaning that offence has been taken, even if not 
on page 65, provides guidance on costs, enhancements/drawbacks 

intentionally offered. 
or higher and lower quality goods. 

The prices quoted assume availability is good. When there is a 
short supply of something, prices will rise and, depending on the 

HAaGgGgLlIinNGg commodity, may be anywhere between 10% and 1000% higher than 
Reducing a price to a reasonable amount is known as Haggling. quoted (1d100x10%). The environment, too, will affect availability 

In some cultures haggling is a major source of social interaction, a and therefore cost. Items, and commodities are generally easier and 
prime source of daily entertainment. A skilled negotiator can achieve cheaper to obtain in larger settlements with established markets and 
substantial discounts through careful haggling, although it is rare for 

traders. In remote or rural areas all but the most basic of locally 
any seller to allow themselves to make a loss on any transaction. produced goods and foodstufts will be more difficult to obtain; and 
To do so on a regular basis would soon place them out of business. will command a higher price, if available at all. 
Prices listed in the Equipment section assume a ‘standard’ profit 
margin for the seller, enough to reasonably support themselves. 

The process works in a slightly different way from Bartering, in 
that participants use Insight rather than Customs to gain an advan- 
tage in the negotiation. This is followed by a Differential Roll of 

56



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 

helm made from sewing boar tusks to a leather cap, or a suit of half- 
CUuLlTtUuRrEe/MILilIiEeuU 

plate from cuir bouilli dinosaur leather or carved jade. Of course 
Depending on the setting for your MYTHRAS game, not all items 

some materials are stronger than others; a bronze breastplate will be 
will be available. One would not expect clockwork mechanisms or 

thinner and lighter than an equivalent made from rhino hide. Thus 
wheeled vehicles to be available in a MYTHRAS setting modelled on 

the material used to manufacture the armour affects its Encum- 
Ancient Mesoamerica, for example. Equipment is therefore pro- 

brance (ENC). 
vided with a Culture/Milieu classification to help Games Masters 

No matter what material the armour is made of], it cannot be 
identify what is and isn’t available in a particular setting. This is a 

layered with other types — such concepts are already incorporated as 
rough guide only, but one that helps recreate an authentic atmo- 

part of its construction. Armour is assumed to come with whatever 
sphere (if one is needed; your MYTHRAS setting may be deliberately 

lining or padding would normally be expected as part of the com- 
anachronistic). 

plete panoply. 
The Culture/Milieu classifications are: 

Each type of armour is defined by the following qualities: 

& Prehistoric (P): Ttems likely to be found in settings and cul- 
& AP: The number of armour points given to each location 

tures that have not progressed much beyond the Stone Age. 
covered by this armour. If a character is wearing multiple 

& Ancient (A): Ttems likely to be available in settings and cul- 
pieces of armour on a location, only the highest armour point 

tures equating to the Bronze and Iron Ages. 
score is used although the ENC incurred is cumulative. 

& Medieval (M): Ttems likely to be available in settings and cul- 
& ENC: The typical weight and bulk of the armour. Use 

ture equating to the European Middle Ages. 
the Material Types table to adjust ENC for more unusual 

& Renaissance (R): Ttems likely to be available to settings and 
materials. 

cultures equating to the European Renaissance. 
& Cost: The cost, in Silver Pieces, per location covered. Price 

& Enlightenment (E): Ttems likely to be available in settings and 
assumes the armour is made from common local material, 

cultures equating to the European Age of Enlightenment 
more exotic substances increase this cost. 

(17th and 18th Centuries). 
& Milieu: Typical milieus where this type of armour occurs. 

& Industrial (I): Ttems found in settings and cultures that have 
embarked on an Industrial Revolution. The Armour Table lists each of the characteristics by armour 

type, and also summarises the encumbrance and cost for a full suit, 
covering all seven Hit Locations, for the armour in question assum- 
ing construction from standard materials. The Armour Penalty for a 

ARrmMOoUuRr full suit of the same armour is given in parentheses. 
In the Material Types table, no cost adjustments are given for the 

Worn for protection against physical harm, armour reduces the 
amount of damage a Hit Location sustains by its Armour Point construction of armour from more unusual materials, only its effect 

on ENC. The availability and additional cost of such substances 
value. Armour of any kind therefore offers a significant advantage 

is wholly dependent on the campaign setting. For instance, chitin 
in combat, and helps improve the chances of survival. The downside 
to armour is that it can be heavy and restrictive to movement; fight- armour would be impossible in a game where giant insects did not 

exist. Likewise if chitin is only available to primitive or hostile cul- 
ing for a sustained period in metal armour takes its toll in terms of 

tures, it might be vastly more expensive for someone in a civilised 
fatigue, and also slows down the ability to react. 

Armour is ranked according to the manner in which it is con- culture to purchase armour made from the material, assuming 
somebody in the city could actually craft or import it. On the other 

structed and overall coverage, not the actual material it was made 
from. For example it is perfectly permissible to manufacture a scaled hand, it might be the default armour substance for tribesmen lack- 

ing metallurgy. 

LiInNoOtThHoOrRaAxX BEeZzAaIinNTteEdD CHhAaIiNnMmAaIiLl HoorpLliiTte CUuIiRrAaSsSs 

57



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt 

ARrMmOoUuRr TAaBbLlEe 

Base . Cost per Suit ENC/Cost/ Armour . 
. Construction Example . Milieu 

Material Location Penalty 

Natural/Cured Furs, Hides 1 2 20 14/140/3 Any 

Padded/Quilted Aketon, Gambeson 2 1 80 7/560/2 Any 
Flexible 

Laminated Linothorax, Bezainted 3 2 180 14/1260/3 A-M 

Scaled Brigandine, Lamellar 4 3 320 21/2240/5 A-R 

Half Plate Hoplite Plate 5 4 500 28/3500/6 A-R 

Rieid Mail Mail Hauberk, Laminar 6 5] 900 30/6300/7 A-R 
fest 

Plated Mail Splinted Chainmail 7 6 1400 42/9800/9 M-E 

Articulated Plate Gothic Plate 8 7 2400 49/16800/10 M-E 

MMAaTtEeRrIiAaLl  TTyyPpeess  TTaasbLlee ARrmMOoUuRr AanNDd SIZ 
ENC Flexible armour will generally fit one point of SIZ more or less 

Material Modifier Notes than the SIZ it was designed for. Rigid armour is crafted to fit a 

Bulky though light, desiccated bone can be used in wearer of specific proportions, so it will only fit the same SIZ and 
B 1.5 . . . 
one * Laminated, Scaled, and Plate construction frame for which it has been demgned. 

. i Bronze, like iron, is considered the default material for 
ronze X . 

sigd armour ARrmMOoUuRr PEeNnAaLlTtYy tToO InNIitTiIaAtTIivVeE 
Lighter than other rigid materials it can be used for Armour can be heavy and impede movement to some degree. 

Chitin «0.75  Laminated, Scaled, and Plate armours. Chitin can The vast bulk of those who train in weapons also train in armour, 
only be carved however, not moulded, so large armour and so become accustomed to armour’s rigours, but this does not 
segments must come from insects of suitable size mean they are free from its more restrictive effects. 

. o i considered the default MyTHRAS simulates this through the Initiative Penalty. The more 
ezl for mgt TS armour one wears, and the heavier or more encumbering it is, the 

Tory <los  leethand tusks can be fashioned as part of greater the Initiative Penalty. This penalty is applied to a character’s 
Laminated, Scaled, and Plate Initiative. Its calculation is simple enough; add together the ENC for 
Leather can be tanned or boiled to make it rigid, and all the armour worn, and then divide by 5, rounding up. A full suit 
thus used in the construction of any armour save mail, of plated mail, having an ENC of 6 per location, and covering seven 

Leather x2 providing it is thick enough; crocodile skin fora  suit of locations has an Armour Penalty of (6X7)/5 = 8.2, rounded up to 

Lejileigiogexample urs jand Hide armour is by 9. Thus a character wearing a full set would reduce his Initiative by 
default assumed to be made from leather 9 pOil’ltS 

. Linen or its woollen equivalent is considered the default 
Linen x1 . . . . 

material used in flexible armours up to Laminated ANATHAYM’S SAGA 
Anathaym’s Saga

Shell tetonbedthisck, and h t ke . . . 
Cf a_rm;ur_l_en ; s blc a; ZVY. . m; . d Meerish Warrwors wear Hoplite Half Plate armour: helm, greaves, vam- 

up for its fragility, but can be used in Laminated, an . . . 
Shell x2 P N ) i ) braces, breatsplate, and kilt. Anathaym therefore has her seven Hit Locations 

Scaled armour; or if the source creature is of sufficient i . . . 
o I covered with armour having an ENC value of 4 per prece. The total ENC is 

S1Z€, S1ngle P1eces carves own to shape Ior Flate . . . 

therefore 28, and her Initiatwe Penalty due to the Hoplite Armour 28/5. Her 
i Tougher, and lighter than other fabrics, silk can be used e . 

Silk x0.75 Initiative Penally s therefore -6. 
to make flexible armours 

Superior in strength to iron or bronze, it is can be 

Steel x0.75 fashioned into thinner, lighter pieces for rigid material 

armours 

ACcCcOoMmMmOoDdAaTtIioONn 
ot often used due to its weight, stones such as jade or . 
bad b L and s 4 I J, Accommodation can be permanent or temporary, fixed or trans- 

obsidian can be carved, an round Into smaj 1€CCS . . 
Stone x3 N P portable. Prices for rented temporary accommodation, such as a 

suitable for laminated or scaled armours, or large single . . . 
room at an inn, are per night. Food is extra. 

segments worn as impromptu half-plate cuirasses . R i 
As always, accommodation costs will vary with seasons and 

demand. In busy periods — markets, festivals, and so on — prices will 
climb with demand, and larger towns and cities will charge more, in 
general, than smaller ones. 

58



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 

ACcCcOoMmMmOoDdAaTtIioONn TAaBbLlEe CLloOTtHhIinNgG TAaBbLlEe 

Accommodation Garment Cheap Reasonable Superior 
Cheap Reasonable Superior 

Type Boots 25 50 100 

Common room floor/ Cap or Hat 3 6 18 
0.5 - - 

stables 
Gloves, Socks or 5 10 20 

Shared room/ Underwear 

dormitory 
General Coat or Cloak 20 45 90 

Private room 
Vest or Tabard 10 20 50 

Rented hovel or shack 
Tunic or Dress 15 30 78 

(week) 
Sandals 4 8 20 

Rented cabin or 
Shoes 20 45 90 

cottage (week) — sleeps 15 25 50 
Trousers, Skirt or Kilt 12 25 60 

small family 
Shirt, Smock or Shift 8 16 35 

Rented house or 

apartment (week) — 30 50 75 Winter Coat or Cloak 30 75 150 

sleeps large family 

Rented villa or 

mansion(week) — sleeps 100 250 1000 

small entourage 

Hovel or shack to buy 100 - - 

Cabin or Cottage to 
750 1,250 2,500 

buy (per bedroom) FooDd 
House or Apartment Food is not specified by any particular type in MYTHRAS as it can 

to buy (per 2 3,000 5,000 7,500 vary dramatically according to culture: assume that food bought is 

bedrooms) a meal which, for a very basic, cheap meal typically includes some 
kind of broth, pastry or bread, and some brewed or dairy bever- 

Villa or Mansion 

to buy 20,000 50,000 200,000 age. More expensive meals include larger portions of meat or fish, 

(per 4 bedrooms) a wider range of seasonal fruits and vegetables, and a better grade 

Tent (per person of beverage. A superior meal consists of several varied courses, and 

capacity) luxuries of some sort such as rare meats, spices or imported fruits. 
Trail rations consist of food preserved for long life, such as dried 

and cured meats, cheese, bread (usually unleavened flatbread for 
case of transport), and cereals, either nuts or grains. 

Characters need to eat and drink at least once per day or begin 
to suffer penalties, see Survival on page 49. 

CLloOTtHhIinNgG 
All characters begin the game with a set of clothes appropri- 

ate to their culture and social class, but through wear and tear it Foopd TAaBbLlEe 
will become necessary to replace existing garments as well as buy Type Cheap Reasonable Superior 

new ones appropriate to the local conditions or to celebrate unusual Meal at a tavern or inn 1 3 8 

occasions. Those of high Social Class may even be required to con- Ale or Beer for an evening 1 1.3 3] 

tinually purchase new sets of clothes simply to keep up with fashion. 
Wine or Spirits for an 2 4 6 

The following prices are merely guidelines. There is technically 
evening 

no upper limit as to how much an item of garb can cost once you 
Trail rations (7 days) 7 9 12 

take into consideration exotic fabrics, embroidery, dyed colours, and 
decorations of precious furs or jewels. 

Assuming more or less continual wear, cheap clothing can be 
worn for a year before it is rendered to rags. Reasonable clothing 
lasts for twice that before being reduced to cheap status. Superior 
clothing lasts for three years of wear, and then is downgraded to 

LIivVeEsStToOcCkK 
reasonable status. 

In many communities livestock represents cash wealth, and may 
Repairing clothing is a normal part of everyday life. In most cul- 

even form the local currency. Livestock needs to be fed and ten- 
tures it is commonplace to provide garments, footwear or the fabric 

dered. The cost to maintain livestock in bought food (grazing will 
to make such things as part of an employee’s annual wages. 

usually be free during appropriate seasons, but stockpiled food is 
essential in inclement seasons) for a week is usually a twentieth of 
the animal’s price. 
A creature’s inherent worth is not simply dependent on how 

much food it produces when butchered. Some are valued for their 

59

o 

(& 

fanl 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt 

ability to draw vehicles or ploughs, whilst others may be a source Tools ENC Cost 
of valuable materials such as ivory or chitin. A few creatures might 

Abacus 8 SP 
even be kept for their ability to fight or hunt. 

Astrolabe (Ancient onwards) 200 SP 
The following table only offers general livestock. In more exotic 

Backpack/Satchel (holds up to 20 ENC) 5SP 
settings one can expect to see a greater range of creatures available, 
anything from giant insects to flying beasts. Higher quality usually Bedroll 1 SP 

reflects better physical characteristics or training, but can be merely Bit & Bridle 15 SP 

based upon the creature’s aesthetic beauty. Block & tackle 15 SP 

Bottle, glass/ earthenware 2 SP 
Livveessttoock TAaBbLlEe 

Candle, 6 hour 1 SP 

Item Poor Quality  Reasonable Superior 
Chain, 2m 40 SP 

Bull 500 1000 3000 
Chest, Large (holds up to 100 ENC) 80 SP 

Calf 30 60 180 
Chest, Small (holds up to 50 ENC) 40 SP 

Camel 1100 2200 6000 
Cooking Pot (for travel) 3 SP 

Cow 100 200 600 
Craft tools (basic tools to match a handicraft) 75 SP 

Towl 1 2 4 
Crop (riding) 15 SP 

Goat 25 50 100 
Crowbar 25 SP 

Horse (cavalry/ 3000 6000 10,000 Doorjamb 5SP 
war-trained) 

Driver’s whip 25 SP 
Horse (heavy draught) 1400 2800 8000 

Talconer’s Kit 30 SP 
Horse (riding) 1200 2500 7000 

Feed/mount rations (per day) 5CP 
Ox 150 300 800 

Tine wine goblet (glass — double for silver) 8 SP 
Pig 25 50 150 

Tirst aid kit (useful for 10 applications of First Aid 
Sheep 25 50 150 25 SP 

skill) 

Fish hooks (20) 1 SP 

Tishing kit 15 SP 

Tishing Net 10 SP 

Flint & tinder 1 SP 

Tooouils Game Snares, and Traps 1 SP 

Tools include all the items any self-respecting adventurer can be Goad 25 SP 
expected to own: rope, sacks and bags, candles, lanterns, and so on. 

Grappling hook 58P 
All items in this list are deemed to be of reasonable quality. 

Hammer/Saw/Mallet/ Chisel 1 SP 

Healer’s kit (useful for 10 applications of Healing 
150 SP 

skall) 

Hourglass (Ancient onwards) 20 SP 

Knife (tool, not weapon) 58P 

Ladder, rope 3m 2 SP 

Lantern, basic 1 10 SP 

Lock picks 75 SP 

1-4 

Lockbox depending 75 - 250 SP 

on size 

Lodestone 58P 

Milling Stone 2 8 SP 

Mirror (hand glass) 12 SP 

Mug/Beaker/Dish/Plate (wood — double price for 
5 CP each 

metal) 

Musical instrument 70 SP 

Nails or tacks (50) 2 CP 

Oil flask 1 SP 

Papyrus or paper sheet (double the cost for vellum) 5CP 

[ RSN& o 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcCoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 

Tools ENC Cost with their own weapon. The Reach categories are Touch (T), Short (S), 
Medium (M), Long (L), and Very Long (VL). 

Oil flask 1 1 SP 
& Combat Effects: The design of the weapon allows it access lo weapon 

Papyrus or paper sheet (double the cost for vellum) — 5CP 
specific Special Effects. Swords, for instance, slce and stab, and so are 

Pickaxe 1 35 SP 
permitted access to the Impale and Bleed effects, whereas a mace us unable 

Pole, 3m 1 1 SP lo produce those effects but could inflict Stun Location instead (see Special 
Quills , and ink for writing 1 30 SP LEffects page 95). 
Quiver — 2 SP « ENC: The weapon’s combined encumbrance and weight 
Razor, folding — 3 Sp « AP/HPA:ll weapons are ratedf or thewr Armour Points and Hut Points; 
Rope (hemp), 10m 2 10 SP their ability to withstand direct damage, and how much damage they 

Sack, large (holds up to 60 ENC) 1 5CP can lolerate before breaking. Those weapons that rely on metal for ther 
damage capability are assumed to be either bronze or iron. 

Sack, small (holds up to 30 ENC) — 2CP 
Trauts: Some weapons, due to their specialised nature, have certain qual- 

Saddle, riding 3 60 SP 
wtes, or traits, that differentiate them from weapons of a sumilar style. 

Saddle, war 4 90 SP 
The common traits are: 

Saddlebag (holds up to 2x20 ENC) 2 20 SP & Barbed — If impaled it will cause_full vather than half damage on 
Saw, hand 1 1 SP being yankedf ree. 
Scythe/ Sickle 2 30 SP &K Defensive — If used to parry an attacking weapon, that weapon is 
Sextant (Renaissance cultures, and later) 1 25 SP considered one size smaller than it actually 5. So a Large sword 

Ship’s Compass (Medieval cultures, and later) 1 70 SP 15 considered Medium, and a Medium sword is considered Small. 

Shoes, horse 1 10 SP Weapons already Small in size are unaffected. 
K Double Ended — If broken in combal, the length remaining in the 

Spade/Hoe/Pitchfork 1 25 SP 
hand can be reversed, and used as a shorter version of the orginal 

Torch, 1 hour — 4 CP 
weapon. 

Torch, 6 hour 1 8 CP 
&K Entrapping — As per the Defensive trait, but also allows use of the 

Waterskin or Canteen (holds 2 litres of liquid) 1 5CP 
Pin Weapon special effect without needing to roll a Critical. 

Wax, block 1 2 CP &K Flexible — If the opponent is using a shield to parr, the shield is 
considered one size smaller than it actually is. So a Huge shield s 

considered Large, a Large shueld 1s considered Medium, and so on. 
& Mount— The weapon must be usedf rom the back of @ moving mount. 
&K Offensive — The weapon cannot be used to parry. 
& Pussive Block — The weapon can passively block multiple Hit Loca- 

tions, which must be contiguous lo one another. 
& Ranged Parry — The weapon can parry ranged weapons. 

MEeLlEeEe WEeAaPpOoNnSs K Set — The weapon can be set io receive a_foot or mounted chage. 

The weapons listed here cover a wide gamut of societies and &K Stealth — The weapon must be usedfrom ambush. 
periods. Some weapons, such as swords, axes, and spears, are ubiq- &K Thiown — The weapon can be used as a ranged weapon as well as 

uitous, whereas others have firm cultural and period groundings. In a hand-to-hand weapon. 

many societies it is deemed both necessary and desirable to carry 
some means of defending oneself. Customs always vary though, and & Cost: The weapon’s cost in Silver Pieces. 

the type of weapon carried depends very much on circumstances. 
The melee weapon tables begin on page 63. 

Having a sword and dagger anchored to one’s belt may not be 
thought unusual, for instance, whereas carrying a halberd or greats- 
word would be deemed unthinkable unless one is actively preparing 
for war. RAaNnGgEedD WEeAaPpOoNnSs 

All weapons are governed by a series of characteristics which are Ranged weapons deal damage at a distance, and do not require 
as follows: physical contact between combatants; such as a thrown rock, a bullet 

from sling or an arrow from a bow. Being able to harm an oppo- 
&K Damage: The amount of damage the weapon delivers if an attack is 

nent from range has clear advantages: one can take advantage of 
successful. 

cover and greater protection and, unless the opponent has a ranged 
&K Size: Fvery weapon is ratedf or its mass, leverage and stability. The Size 

weapon himself] the chances of you being injured are lessened. 
us used lo determine the weapon’s ability to inflict and parry damage (see 

Since dealing damage at range inevitably means imparting veloc- 
page 94). The size categories are Small (S), Medium (M), Large (L), 

ity to some form of projectile, ranged weapons are difficult to defend 
Huge (H), and Enormous (E). 

against. Without a shield or other form of solid cover that can 
& Reach: Every weapon is also ratedf or ils Reach — ils length and ability 

disperse the energy of a projectile, ranged weapons cannot be par- 
lo hold a foe at bay due to its length. The longer the weapon the greater 

ried; meaning that the best defence, if one is aware of an incoming 
its ability to prevent an opponent getting close enough to inflict damage 

missile, is evasion. However evasion often puts the defendant into a 
situation where returning an attack, even a ranged one, is difficult. 

61



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcCoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt 

Ranged weapons have very similar characteristics to Melee arrows, as long as the appropriate raw materials, and a suitable work 
Weapons, although there are some differences as noted below: area or workshop are available for the task. If bought from a crafts- 

man then the costs are as follows: 
&K Damage: The amount of damage the weapon delivers if an attack is 

successful. & Arrows (per sheaf of a dozen) 4 SP 
& Damage Modifier: Not all ranged weapons can take advantage of a char- & Quarrels (per sheaf of a dozen) 3 SP 

acter’s damage modifier. A Ves or No entry dictates whether or not the & Lead sling bullets (per bag of twenty) 1 SP 
user’s damage modifier can be applied. & Blowgun darts (per half dozen) 2 SP 

& Force: Each ranged weapon possesses a_force rating equivalent to the & Thrown darts (per sheaf of a dozen) 2 SP 
Size’ of close combat weapons. In the case of projectiles, this does not 

Ranged Weapon tables begin on page 65. 
relate to the firing weapon self; but rather to how much impact’ s 
ammunition has. The value is used to determine whether the weapon can 
overcome any shield which may parry it. The size categories are Small 
(S), Medium (M), Large (L), Huge (H), and Enormous (E). SIieEgGEe WEeAaPpOoNnSs 

&K Range: This is a measwre of the weapon’s effictiveness at thiee distances 
Most siege weapons are used to lob simple bolts or stones at tar- 

separated by slashes, representing the maximum Close, Effective and 
gets. They are so powerful that a direct hit will generally cripple 

Long ranges of the weapon or its ammunition. Ranges are expressed in 
or kill most armoured humanoids with a single shot. However, it 

metres. Note that distance penalties to the user’s skill are independentfrom 
is often only siege weapons which can hurt larger creatures such as 

the weapon, see page 108. 
giants or dragons . If not being used in battle most siege weapons 

& Close Range — The distance over which Choose Location may be used 
are used to reduce fortifications, breaching holes in walls or destroy- 

as a non-critical special effect, provided the target is stationary or ing defensive towers hosting their own siege weapons. 
unaware of the impending attack. The following weapons do not use handedness, damage bonuses 

& Effective Range — The distance over which there are no significant or ENC being beyond such issues. The Size of their projectiles is 
modfiers on the weapon’s accuracy or power rated as Beyond Enormous (BE), meaning that no shield will protect 

& Long Range — The distance over which the weapon can stll inflict against the force of such impacts. Due to the nature of the weapons, 
harm, but the amount of damage is halved, and its Force is reduced 

Range only has two values; Effective Range and Long Range. 
by one step. 

&K Load: This shows how many turns are required to load or reload a NOoTtEeSs oONn SIieEgGEe WEeAaPpOoNnSs 
weapon which fires ammunition. 

& Combat EffectsA:s per Close Combal weapons. & Reloading time is measured in Combat Rounds, not Turns. 

&K Impaling Size: The effective size of the weapon or its ammunition if it & Crew: This is the minimum and maximum crew required to 

succeeds in an impaling attack. operate the weapon. Each extra person above the minimum 

& ENC: The weapon’s combined encumbrance and weight. value reduces the Load time by 1. 

& AP/HPA:ll weapons are ratedf or their Armour Points and Hit Points; & Siege Weapon Combat Effects are included for attacks 

their ability to withstand direct damage, and how much damage they against large or colossal creatures. They are superfluous 

can tolerate before breaking Those weapons that rely on metal for their against fortifications. 

damage capability are assumed to be either bronze or iron. 
Siege Weapon tables begin on page 64. 

&K Cost: The weapon’s cost in Silver Pieces. 

1! Thrown javeellins maay use the Pin Weeapon special effeect agaiinsst shiielldss,, wiithout 
needing to rooll laa Crriittiicaall.. 

VEeHhIiCcLlEeSs 
RAaNnGgEeDd WEeAaPpOoNn AMmMmUuNInTitIioONn Most vehicles are drawn by one or more animals, and move at 

Weapons such as bows and crossbows use ammunition to deliver the animal’s rate. The number of animals required, for the animals 
damage. Arrows, quarrels, darts and bullets can be made by any- to maintain their standard movement rate, is noted in the Draw col- 
one with the appropriate craft skill, for example Craft (Fletcher) for umn of the vehicles table. Reduce the movement proportionately 

if fewer animals are used. Generally drivers will not exceed the 
required number of animals because this decreases control, stability, 
and integrity. 

The amount a vehicle can carry in terms of driver(s), and passen- 
gers, and cargo (total ENC) is indicated in the Load column. Again, 
drivers will refuse to exceed these load amounts because control, and 
stability becomes more difficult. 

Vehicle tables begin on page 64. 

62



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 

ONnEe HAaNnDdEeDd WEeAaPpOoNnSs 
Weapon Damage Size Reach  Combat Effects ENC AP/HP Traits Milieu Cost 

Bash, Entangle, Stun 
Ball & chain 1d6+1 M M . 2 6/8 Flexible M 250 SP 

Location 

Battleaxe 1d6+1 M M Bleed, Sunder 1 4/8 A-R 100 SP 

Broadsword 1d8 M M Bleed, Impale 2 6/10 A-E 175 SP 

Chain 1d4 M M Entangle 1 8/6 Flexible A-T 10 SP 

Club 1d6 M S Bash, Stun Location 1 4/4 All 5SP 

Dagger 1d4+1 S S Bleed, Impale . 6/8 Thrown All 30 SP 

Hatchet 1d6 S S Bleed 1 4/6 Thrown All 25 SP 

Falchion 1d6+2 M M Bleed 1 6/10 A-M 200 SP 

Flail 1d6 M M Bash 1 3/6 Flexible A-M 25 SP 

Knife 1d3 S S Bleed, Impale . 5/4 All 10 SP 

Lance 1d10+2 H VL Impale, Sunder 3 4/10 Mount A-M 150 SP 

Longsword 1d8 M L Bleed, Impale 2 6/12 M-R 250 SP 

Mace 1d8 M S Bash, Stun Location 1 6/6 A-R 100 SP 

Main Gauche 1d4 S S Bleed e 6/10 Entrapping M-E 180 SP 

Military pick 1d6+1 M M Stun Location, Sunder 3 6/10 M-E 180 SP 

Entrapping, 
Net 1d4 S L Entangle 3 2/20 All 20 SP 

Thrown 

Rapier 1d8 M L Impale 1 5/8 E 100 SP 

Sabre 1d6+1 M M Bleed, Impale 1 6/8 E-1 225 SP 

Scimitar 1d8 M M Bleed 2 6/10 M-E 200 SP 

Shortspear 1d8+1 M L Impale 2 4/5 Set, Thrown All 20 SP 

Shortsword 1d6 M S Bleed, Impale 1 6/8 All 100 SP 

Trident 1d8 M L Impale 2 4/10 Barbed, Thrown A-M 155 SP 

Entrapping, 

Whip 1d3 M VL Entangle, Stun Location 1 2/8 Flexible, A-M 100 SP 

Offensive 

Shields

Shield Damage Size Reach  Combat Effects ENC AP/HP Traits Milieu Cost 

. Ranged Parry; Passive 50 SP 
Buckler 1d3 M S Bash, Stun Location 1 6/9 i M-E 

Blocks 2 locations 

. Ranged Parry; Passive 150 SP 
Heater 1d4 L S Bash, Stun Location 2 6/12 i M 

Blocks 3 locations 

. . Ranged Parry; Passive 300 SP 
Hoplite 1d4 H S Bash, Stun Location 3 6/15 i A-M 

Blocks 4 locations 

. . Ranged Parry; Passive 300 SP 
Kite 1d4 H S Bash, Stun Location 3 4/15 i M 

Blocks 4 locations 

. Ranged Parry; Passive 150 SP 
Peltast 1d4 L S Bash, Stun Location 2 4/12 i A-M 

Blocks 3 locations 

. Ranged Parry; Passive 450 SP 
Scutum 1d4 H S Bash, Stun Location 4 4/18 i A-M 

Blocks 5 locations 

Ranged Parry; Passive 150 SP 
Target 1d3+1 L S Bash, Impale 2 4/9 i A-E 

Blocks 3 locations 

. . Ranged Parry; Passive 300 SP 
Viking 1d4 L S Bash, Stun Location 3 4/12 M 

Blocks 4 locations 

63



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt 

Two HAaNnDdEeDd WEeAaPpOoNnSs 
Weapon Damage Size Reach Combat Effects ENC AP/HP Traits Milieu Cost 

Battleaxe 1d8+1 L M Bleed, Sunder 1 4/8 A-M 100 SP 

Garrotte 1d2 S - e 1/2 Stealth A-1 15 SP 

Glaive/ Rhomphaia 1d10+2 L L Bleed, Sunder 2 4/10 A-M 250 SP 

Great axe 2d6+2 H IL, Bleed, Sunder 2 4/10 A-M 125 SP 

Great club 2d6 H L Bash, Stun Location 3 4/10 All 50 SP 

Great hammer 1d10+3 H L R 3 4/10 M-E 250SP 
Sunder 

Greatsword 2d8 H L Bleed, Impale, Sunder 4 6/12 M-E 300 SP 

Halberd/Polcaxe 1d8+2 L vy el 4 4/10 Set AE 200 SP 
Impale, Sunder 

Longspear 1d10+1 L VL Impale 2 4/10 Set All 30 SP 

Longsword 1d10 L L Bleed, Impale, Sunder 2 6/12 M-E 250 SP 

Military flail 1d10 L L Bash, Stun Location 3 4/10 Flexible A-M 250 SP 

Pike/Sarissa 1d10+2 L VL Impale 4 4/12 Set A-M 90 SP 

Quarterstaff’ 1d8 M L Stun Location 2 4/8 Defensive All 20 SP 

Xyston 1d10 L VL Impale 3 4/10 Sct; Double A 100 SP 
Ended 

SIieEgGEe WEeAaPpOoNnSs 
Weapon Damage Rflnge Load  Crew SIZ Combat Effects AP/HP Milieu Cost 

Effective Long 

Scorpion 3d6 150m 300m 4 1/1 BE Impale, Sunder 4/15 A-M 750 SP 

Ballista 4d6 200m 400m 5 2/4 BE Impale, Sunder 4/25 A-M 1,000 SP 

Mangonel 5d6 250m 500m 6 2/4 BE Bash, Stun 4/50 M 1,250 SP 

Onager 6d6 300m 600m 7 3/6 BE Bash, Stun 4/75 A-M 1,500 SP 

Couillard 7d6 350m 700m 8 3/6 BE Bash, Stun 4/100 M 3,000 SP 

Trebuchet 8d6 400m 800m 9 4/8 BE Bash, Stun 4/150 M 5,000 SP 

VEeHhIiCcLlEeSs 
Vehicle Occupants/Load ENC Draw Milieu Cost 

Two wheeled cart (hayrick, ox cart or similar) 6/60 1 A-1 60 

Two wheeled wagon (goods cart, carriage or similar) 10/100 1 A1 175 

Four Wheeled Freight wagon 10/200 2 A-1 500 

War Chariot 2/20 2 AT 1200 

Sedan Chair (carried by humans) 1/10 2 A-1 400 

Palanquin (carried by humans) 4/40 8 Al 2000 

Stage Coach (covered and comfortable) 8/200 4 R, I 8000 

Heavy Coach (covered and comfortable) 12/400 8 R, I 15000 

64



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 

RAaNnGgEeDd WEeAaPpOoNnSs 
I;/‘:;ii[i Damage l])[;:; Force  Range Load C;fir:izt In;f::le ENC  AP/IHP  Milieu Cost 

Atlat] — — +1 Step +0/+25/+75 1 — — 1 1/4 P 10 SP 

Blowgun e N — 10/20/30 2 — — . 1/4 P 30 SP 

Bolas 1d4 N — 10/25/50 — Entangle — — 2/2 P-A 10 SP 

Dagger 1d4 Y S 5/10/20 . Impale S . 6/8 All 30 SP 

Dart 1d4 Y S 5/10/20 — Impale S — 2/1 P-A 10 SP 

Discus 1d4+1 Y L 5/20/40 e Stun Location — . 2/3 A 30 SP 

Hatchet 1d6 Y S 10/20/30 — Bleed — 1 4/6 All 25 SP 

Wiy uosihmy 1d10 N H 20/150/300 4 Impale, S 2 4/8 ME 350 SP 
Sunder 

Impale, Pin 

Javelin 1d8+1 Y H 10/20/50 — Weapon M 1 3/8 A-M 20 SP 

(Shield) 

Light crossbow 1d8 N L 20/100/200 3 Impale S 1 4/5 M-E 150 SP 

Long bow 1d8 Y H 15/125/250 2 Impale S 1 4/7 M 200 SP 

Net . N . 3/5/10 . Entangle — 3] 2/20 All 20 SP 

Recurve bow 1d8 Y H 15/125/250 2 Impale S 1 4/8 A-M 225 SP 

Short bow 1d6 Y L 15/100/200 2 Impale S 1 4/4 P-M 75 SP 

Shortspear 1d8 Y L 10/15/30 - Impale M 1 4/5 All 20 SP 

Sling 1d8 N L 10/150/300 3 Stun Location — . 1/2 P-M 5SP 

Staff sling 2d6 N E 5/25/50 4 Stun Location — 2 3/6 A-M 20 SP 

Stone/Rock 1d3 Y S 5/10/20 . Stun Location — All 

Trident 148 Y L 10/15/30 — Barbed, M 2 4/10 AM  155SP 
Impale 

E might be reduced by several grades. Some repairing, and manufac- 
EqQUu i] pPmMEeNnTt turing tasks will be simply impossible without the right elements, and 

Games Masters will need to adjudicate based on local circumstances 
MAaNn uU fFaAcCtTuU rR]i nN gG (does a village have a working forge? Is iron, and wood available?), 

AND UALITY and on common sense. 
and Quality

With the right resources characters can make, repair, and CI RCUMSTANCE M ODIFIERS 
Circumstance Modifiers

enhance the quality of items they acquire. The right resources are 
The following modifiers may be applied, depending on 

the skills to do the job (usually a Craft skill, or Engineering/Mecha- 
circumstances: 

nisms); tools, and other equipment, such as a forge, workbench, and 
so on; and, finally, time. 

? ’ ¥ tm REeSsoOUuRrCcEe MOoDIdFifIiEeRrSs TAaBbLlEe 

Circumstances Skill Grade 
REeSsoOUuRrCcEeSs 

No tools Hopeless 
Access to resources is essential to the task. These will differ from . 

Improvised tools Herculean 
one job to another but will, at the very least, involve suitable tools, Poor Quality/1 . ) 

. . oor Qualll ncomplete tools, or . 
materials, and a suitable place of work (a forge or workshop for ) ty P Formidable 

lacking crucial resources 
example). 

The availability of resources determines a number of things: 
TaAsk ROoUuNnDdSs 

& Whether or not the task is possible Building or repairing something is measured by Task Rounds. 
& How long it takes to complete This is a variable amount of time dependent on what is being done. 
& The quality of the output Again, Games Masters should decide how long something is going 
It is the Games Master’s responsibility to decide if available to take, but the suggested Task Round table below offers some sug- 

resources are suitable, and in the right quantities. If they are not gestions, and inspiration: 

then the grade of the skill being used for the task should be reduced 
appropriately— and if there is a true dearth of materials, the skill 

65



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcCoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EQqUuIipPmMEenNTt 

/.\ 

. 

SaAmMPpLlEe TAaskK ROoUuNnDdSs 100%. For example, if a blacksmith is ordered to shape, and fit a 

Task Appropriate Skill Task Round Unit horseshoe in two Task Rounds (half the usual time needed) then, 
unless he scores two critical successes with his skill rolls the finished 

Repairing clothing Craft (Needlework) 5 minutes — 1 hour 
shoes will have no more than 50% of their effectiveness (meaning 

i 5 minutes — 30 
Torging metal Craft (Blacksmith) they are incorrectly shaped, do not fit properly, and may come loose 

minutes 
or even injure the horse). 

Torging a sword Craft (Weaponsmith) 1 days — 5 days 
With unlimited time it is possible to exceed 100%. The percent- 

Erecting a wooden or 6 months — several 
Engineering age achieved at the end of the time available indicates the overall 

stone structure years 
quality of the product or task, as shown in the Item Quality table, 

Mechanisms or Craft 
Sharpening a blade 3 to 5 minutes opposite. Exceptional quality offers enhancements to the product. 

(Weaponsmith) The final percentage reflects the quality of the product or completed 
task. 

Completing the task requires a roll against the relevant skill. Note 
the level of success: 

EnNHhAaNnCcEeMmEeNnTtSs 
« Critical: 50% If a task exceeds 100% in four or fewer Task Rounds it gains 
& Success: 25% Enhancements as indicated in the Item Quality table. If a project 
& Failure : 0% reaches 100% in four or fewer Task Rounds, the maker has the 
& Fumble: —25% option to continue refining it. To do this he continues to work on it 

for a further Task Round and, depending on the result of the skill 
Continue making skill rolls, each taking one Task Round, until 

roll for the Task Round, may enhance it. 
100% has been achieved — or until time, resources, and budget are 
exhausted. Thus, a competent worker will usually be able to accom- & Critical Success: 2 Enhancements 
plish the work in four Task Rounds, assuming a standard Success in & Success: 1 Enhancement 
each round. Reaching 100% means the final result is of an accept- & Failure: No Enhancements 
able standard. Anything less is below par, and may be flawed in & Fumble: Reduce Quality by 25% 
some way. If time is pressing or constrained then the number of 
Task Rounds can be reduced: this will constrain the ability to reach 

66



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  EcoONnOoMmIiCcSs & EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt 

Thus, a fumble actively overworks the item, taking away from its 
quality rather than enhancing it. 

The Enhancement is determined by the nature of the object. 
Choose from the following: 

Enhancements can be stacked: so an item with two Enhance- 
ments could benefit from being highly efficient, for example, con- 
ferring a 10% bonus to the using skill. However no item can benefit 
from more than two Enhancements of the same type. 

ItTeEmM QUuAaLlIiTtYy TAaBbLlEe 

Total 
Result Enhancements 

Score 

150 Excellent 2 

125 Good 1 

100 Acceptable 0 

The product will break or wear out 25% faster 

than normal; or its Hit Points and value are 
75 Flawed N 

reduced by one quarter reflecting its flawed 

durability. 

The product will break or wear out 50% faster 

50 Poor than normal; or its Hit Points and value are 

reduced by half reflecting its flawed durability. 

The product will break or wear out 75% faster 

than normal; or its Hit Points and value are 
25 Shoddy e 

reduced by three quarters reflecting its shoddy 

durability. 

0 orless Unusable The product is simply of no use whatsoever. 

EnNHhAaNnCcEeMmEeNnTtSs TAaBbLlEe 

Enhancement Effect 

Desirable The item’s value is doubled. 

Durable The item’s Hit Points are increased by one. 

Resilient The item’s Armour Points are increased by one. 

Efficient The item of such quality that it confers a 5% bonus to the 

skill required to use it. 

Effective If a weapon it gains +1 to its Damage rating. Other items 

reduce ENC value by 1d2 points. 

UssIinNgG TthHEe TAaSskK RUuLlEeSs iInN 

OTtHhEeRr CIirRcCuUMmSsTtAaNnCcEeSs 
The rules presentedfor making and repairing equipment can be applied 

lo many different situations. Using the same basic mechanics any situation 
requiring an wnwestment of time, effort and skill, and requiring a quality of 
outcome, can be simulated. Some examples are given below: 

Social conflict - where characters are engaged in argument, debate, negoti- 
ation, politics, diplomacy, and so on. 

Affawrs of the heart— seductions, courtshap, proof of love (or even hatred). 
Steges and wars of attrition — use the Task rules to simulate the progress 

of a stege or extended battle over a long-term period. 
Chases and pursuits — use the Task rules where purswits take place over 

days or weeks, rather than in detailed time where an tmmediate result is more 
destrable. 

Games Masters will no doubtf ind their own uses for these rules. 

67



Mythras:  Game System

. — 
o X s oM Kk oo >z 

Yy m KW S I& KB 3 B« i T X W 

Game System

pa— — 
o X s oM Kk oo j< 

Yy m KW S I K KB 3 B« v T X W 

any different things can occur during a MYTHRAS game. 
Some are resolved through skill use or one of the major ACcIidD 

M game mechanics such as combat or magic; others Acids come from many different sources and are used extensively 
require their own rules for adjudication. This chapter provides rules in alchemical research. The most important factor with any acid is 
and guidance for a variety of different scenarios that Games Masters its concentration, rather than its type. All acids are therefore classi- 
and players will encounter whilst playing the game. fied as either Weak, Strong or Concentrated. MYTHRAS assumes that 

The listis not exhaustive but should represent most common situ- contact with the acid is significant or sustained, rather than just a 
ations. If Games Masters find there are other situations that require droplet or two. 
some form of game-system adjudication, and that these situations A splash or spray of acid lasts only for a few Combat Rounds 
seem to occur frequently, then they are encouraged to develop their before it loses potency. Immersion in a considerable volume of 
own rules to cover these special circumstances, using those given in acid inflicts the damage every round until the victim or location is 
this chapter as a basis for replication or development. removed and treated. 

For generic acids it is assumed that armour protects against the 
Briefly this chapter includes rules for: effects of acid but does not stop it, its Armour Points being reduced 

by the acid’s damage until it reaches zero hit points, at which point 
& Acid 

the damage is then transferred to the hit location it protected. 
& Action, Time, and Movement 

Armour reduced to zero Armour Points is considered useless as the 
« Ageing 

acid burns through bindings, straps and joints. 
« Asphyxiation, Drowning, and Suffocation 

Although the Acid table assumes the action of acid on living 
4« Blood Loss 

flesh, not all acids affect non-organic substances equally. Some can 
& Character Improvement 

cat rapidly through metal, whilst others barely mark it. If desired it 
4« Disease and Poison 

is entirely permissible to have strange acids which affect only metal 
& Encumbrance 

or other specific materials instead of flesh. 
& Falling 
« Fatigue AcciidD TAaBbLlEe 
« Fires 

Acid Type Damage Duration 
« Healing from Injury 

Weak 1d2 1 Combat Round 
<« Inanimate Objects 

Strong 1d4 1d2 Combat Rounds 
& Luck Points 

Concentrated 1d6 1d3 Combat Rounds 
&« Passions 

& Survival 
X M 

« Visibility 
« Weather 

63



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

STtRrAaTtEeGgIicC TIimMEe TRrAaVvEeLl TAaBbLlEe 
ACcTtIiOoNn,, TIimMEe aAnNDd Distance Covered (kilometres) per 

Travel Example Day (10-12 hours) 

MOoVvEeMmEeNnTt 
Walking 30 per Day 

How quickly time passes in MYTHRAS depends on circumstances. 
Horseback at casual speed 60 per Day 

Activities in roleplaying games rarely elapse in real time unless char- 
Wagon at casual speed 15 per Day 

acters are conversing with each other or with non-player charac- 
ters. For the most part, timescales for different forms of activity are Open Sea, favourable conditions 150-300 (in a 24 hour period) 

inflated or condensed depending on what is being done. Open Sea, unfavourable 0-60 (in a 24 hour period) 

The key timescales and what actions and motion can be accom- conditions 

plished within them, are as follows: Combat Rounds, Local Time Coast or River, favourable 30-60 per Day 

and Strategic Time. conditions 

Coast or River, unfavourable 0-30 per Day 

CommMB conditions 
bAaTt ROoUuNnDdSs 

A Combat Round, dealt with more fully in the Combat chapter, 
represents five seconds of real time. Combat Rounds are used to 

increase the distance covered, along with dealing with any hazards 
measure short, frenetic bursts of activity that take seconds to com- 

that might need to be resolved in Combat Rounds or Local Time. 
plete. They can be useful for measuring very detailed activities that 
require a blow-by-blow resolution. For example, a chase between 
hunter and prey can be measured in Combat Rounds, represent- MOoVvEeMmEeNnTt 
ing the twists and turns that happen very quickly during any tense Movement is broken down into three ‘gaits’ which are Walking, 
pursuit. Running and Sprinting 

Walking is the average speed a member of a particular spe- 

LocAaLl TIimMEe cies ambles along at when in no particular hurry. This is normally 
referred to as a creature’s base Movement Rate. 

Local Time represents a few minutes to a few hours, and is used 
Running is a trot or jog, at a speed which can be maintained 

to measure activities that do not require the detailed attention of a 
over long periods. Basically, anything faster than a walk. Maximum 

Combat Round, but require a specific concentration of effort with a 
running speed is triple Movement Rate, which may vary according 

definite end result. Picking a lock might take five minutes, and this is 
to the bonus granted by Athletics skill. 

a measure of Local Time. Observing the patrols made by teams of 
Sprinting is flat out movement at top speed, which can only 

guards around a castle’s walls might require several hours, but is still 
be maintained for brief periods. Peak sprinting speed is five times 

a measure of Local Time. Manage Local Time in the following way: 
Movement Rate, which again may be increased according to what- 

1. The character states his intention (Local Time starts) 
ever bonus is granted from Athletics skill. 

2. The Games Master decides how long this takes to 
The Comparative Movement table summarises the typical walk- 

accomplish 
ing distances covered by creatures of differing base movement rates, 

3. Any appropriate skill rolls are made and the results noted 
for a variety of time periods. Tactical movement during combat is 

4. The Games Master communicates the results, and the time 
explained in more detail on page 101 (Engagement). 

taken in step 2 passes (Local Time ends) 

Local Time may then continue, move into Combat Rounds or 
become Strategic Time SCcEeNnEeSs 

Scenes are an abstract time measurement based on definable events or 
wnteractions. They can lastfor Combat Rounds, Local or Strategic Time, 

STtRrAaTtEeGgIicC TIimMEe 
and duration is based on activities being engaged in by one or more charac- 

Strategic Time is measured in days, months or even years. Use 
ters. Some spells, for instance, lastfor a Scene, which means that duration 

Strategic Time for those occasions where it is not necessary to know 
us variable but based on that Scene’s need. For example, if a Folk Magic 

the detail, simply the outcome — “You ride for ten days and reach the 
spell, such as Bladesharp, is cast successfully, it will last for one active 

city by dawn on the eleventh day.’ ‘After a whole day of watching the 
scene. This will be either as short as the duration of an entire combat, or 

guard patrols you now understand their movements and patterns.’ 
as long as a Local Tume event where Bladesharp might be required. Scenes 

‘It takes a week to craft the sword.” 
always have actwe player participation. For instance an evening spent in a 

Strategic Time is mostly concerned with how far characters 
lavern gaining information is a Scene, because it requares the characters to 

travel depending on the mode of transport used. The Strategic 
participate. However a long-dustance trip by sea, where the Games Master 

Time Travel Table offers examples for various conditions. The travel 
stipulates that several days pass without incident, is not a Scene. 

times assume a travelling day of around 10 to 12 hours with regular 
The Games Master always determines when a Scene starts and ends. 

stops for rest, water and food. 
For the most part it will be obvious and important only where magical 

If characters need to increase the distances given in the Strategic effects need to be measured. 
Time Travel Table, then they can effectively add half again to the 
distance travelled in the Strategic Time period but gain an enduring N\ 4 
level of Fatigue as a result. Naturally an appropriate skill roll (Drive, 
Ride, Athletics, and so on) also needs to be made to successfully 

69



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

COoMmPpAaRrAaTtIiVvEe MOoVvEeMmEeNnTt TAaBbLlEe 

Time Period Movement 4m Movement bm Movement 8m Movement 10m Movement 12m Movement 14m 

Combat Round 4m 6m 10m 12m 14m 

Minute 48m 72m 120m 144m 168m 

Hour 2.9km 4.3km 5.8km 7.2km 8.6km 10.1km 

MOoVvIiNnGg InN ARrMmOoUuRr attempts to swim in his armour (Swim speed of 6+4, divided 

Worn armour acts against character Movement Rates, and cer- by two, then subtract 6 equals -1). 

tain kinds of actions such as swimming or climbing. The armour’s & Climbing rough surface (branching trees, ladders, scaffolds, 

Initiative Penalty is applied to Movement of different kinds in the and so on): Half the Armour Penalty (rounded up) is sub- 

following ways: tracted from the base Movement Rate. If the result is zero or 
less, they are too burdened by their armour to climb. Thus, 

& Walking: Armour does not interfere with walking movement, our hero in his Hoplite Plate armour can still scale easily 
although it can increase the Fatigue level (see page 78) climbable objects, as his Climbing movement is 6 — 3 = 3. 

& Running or Sprinting: Subtract the Armour Penalty from the & Climbing a steep surface (pitched roofs, steep hills, and so on): 
running and sprinting speed. The result is how fast the char- The Armour Penalty is subtracted from the base Movement 
acter can move during chases or when charging. For example, Rate. If the result is zero or less, they are too burdened by 
a character wearing a full panoply of Hoplite Plate armour their armour to climb. Thus, our hero in his Hoplite Plate 
would reduce both gaits by 6m. cannot climb as his Climbing movementis 6 —6 = 0. 

& Swimming: Take the character’s swimming speed (see the & Climbing a sheer surface (walls, cliff faces, etc): Double the 
Swim skill page 43) divide by two (rounding up), and sub- Armour Penalty is subtracted from the base Movement Rate. 
tract the Armour Penalty. If the result is zero, the character As with climbing a rough surface, if the result is zero or less, 
cannot move, and barely keeps himself afloat. If the result is the character cannot climb. 
negative, then the character sinks. For example, even if our & Jumping: Reduce the distance in metres the character can 
character was a top class swimmer (84%), wearing full Hop- jump (see the Athletics skill, page 38) by half the Armour 
lite Plate with its -6 penalty, would still cause him to sink if he Penalty (rounded up). For standing jumps this impairment is 

halved. 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Anathaym, like all humans, has a base Movement Rate of 6. In addition 

she is a proficient athlete with an Athletics skill of 52%. From these her 
maximum movement rates are calculated as: 

Walking 6m — base Movement Rate of a human. 

Running 2 1m — Base Movement Rate plus one for her Athletics skill, mul- 
tiplied by three. 

Sprinting 40m — Base Movement Rate plus two for her Athletics skall, mul- 
tiplied by fuve. 

AGgEeIinNgG 
All characters age, and with age come certain consequences. The 

signs of ageing start at Early Middle Age (40 years for humans — 
other species might age at greater or lesser rates). As a character 
passes into a new Ageing Band he must make both an Endurance 
roll and a Willpower roll at the grades noted. If a roll is failed then 
he experiences Ageing Effects as shown in the Ageing Effects table. 

Each characteristic affected by ageing reduces by 1d3 points. 
These points can be recovered or at least partially counteracted 
through characteristic improvement, representing efforts made 
to keep themselves trim and alert as they grow older. If any 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

characteristic is reduced to zero from ageing, the character dies due Depending on the method of asphyxiation, the Games Master 
to his terminal frailty. may wish to prevent full recovery, imposing an enduring level of 

What specific debilitating effects arise as part of the ageing pro- Fatigue to represent damage to the lungs caused by smoke or water 
cess are up to the Games Master to define. lor instance, reducing inhalation. 
STR, CON or DEX represents general wear and tear on the body, 
with creaking joints, and a gradual loss of mobility. Reducing INT 
indicates that age is starting to play tricks on the mind and memory, 
whilst reducing CHA indicates the character is getting craggier, and BLloodD Losss 
more short-tempered perhaps, as they get older. Blood loss due to external and internal wounds, usually sustained 

in combat, can wear a character down very quickly. Its effects are 
measured by the accumulation of Fatigue levels, in a manner similar 

AGgEe BAaNnDds 
to asphyxiation since blood is needed to oxygenate the body’s mus- 

Age Band gr:;igzance and Willpower Roll 
cles and vital organs. Significant blood loss is suffered in the follow- 
ing circumstances: 

Early Middle Age (40-49 for humans) Easy 
Middle Age (50-59 for humans) Standard & The Bleed Special Effect (see page 96) 

Late Middle Age (60-69 for humans) Hard & Injury resulting in a Major Wound (see page 110) 

Old Age (70-79 for humans) Formidable & Diseases and Poisons that result in Bleeding (see page 75) 

Advanced Old Age (80-89 for humans) Herculean Unrestrained blood loss typically results in death unless some 
Dotage (90+ for humans) Hopeless form of medical attention or healing magic can be applied to con- 

trol the bleeding. 
Unlike asphyxiation, the effects of serious blood loss on Fatigue 

are enduring. A character recovers Fatigue lost to bleeding at a rate 
of one level per day, starting the day after his exsanguinations cease. 

AGgEeIinNGg EFfFfEeCcTtSs TAaBbLlEe 
1d6 Physical Ageing (Failed = Mental Ageing (Failed 

Endurance) Willpower) CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr 
1-2 STR INT 

34 CON POW ImMpPrRoOvVeEmMEenNTt 
56 DEX CHA Every MYTHRAS character has the opportunity to improve with 

time. Improvement can be undertaken in several areas: 

& Increasing existing skills 
& Increasing characteristics 

ASsPpHhYyXxIiAaTtIiOoNn,, & Increasing passions 
& Learning new skills 

DRrOoWwNnIiNnGg AanNDd & Learning new magical abilities and spells 

SuUFfFfoOCcAaTtIioOnN 
Characters can hold their breath for a number of seconds equal EXxPpEeRrIieEnNcCEe ROoLlLlSs 

to their Endurance skill. However the character must be prepared The mechanism for most character improvement is the Experi- 

(filling the lungs with as much air as possible); if not, then the period ence Roll. Games Masters dispense Experience Rolls at an appropri- 

is halved if the character was in a passive situation, or reduced to ate juncture in the campaign: at the end of every successful scenario 

one fifth if the character was engaged in strenuous activity. or storyline; or after perhaps two or three sessions of play if the 

Once the period of held breath is over, characters must make an story is a long one which will take time to complete. The frequency 

Endurance roll: is at the Games Master’s discretion. A high frequency of Experience 
Rolls will lead to the characters developing at a faster rate. 

& 1If the roll is a critical success, no further deterioration occurs. There is no right or wrong time to give Experience Rolls, but 
& If the roll is successful, the character accrues an extra level natural breaks in the story may suggest suitable times. The Games 

of Fatigue. Master is, however, always the decision maker here. Whilst players 
& If the roll fails, the character sustains 1d2 extra levels of cannot demand Experience Rolls, they have a right to expect them 

Fatigue that round. at certain times — as their characters will not be able to develop with- 
& If the roll is fumbled, the character sustaing 1d3 extra levels out them. 

of Fatigue that round. 
How MAaNnYy?? 

Without aid, death from asphyxiation is usually swift. If the 
The number of Experience Rolls given in any one sitting should 

asphyxiation ends before the character dies, they recover Fatigue be between two and four, but it can be lower or higher depending 
levels lost to suffocation relatively quickly; regaining one level per 
minute. 

71



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

on how long it has been since the last set of rolls, and how well the a character undergoes following a disastrous failure. Multiple 
characters performed or have been played. fumbles of the same skill do not stack. 

It is recommended that all characters be given the same num- 
Games Masters can, if they wish, increase the dice step if they 

ber of Experience Rolls, which helps maintain fairness and parity 
want to have skill progression move at a faster rate without giving 

in character progression — although even with the same number of 
Experience Rolls on a frequent basis: so, instead of increasing by 

rolls characters may progress at different rates, as the mechanics for 
1d4+1 skills increase by 1d6+1. If adjusting the default dice roll in 

Experience Rolls illustrate. 
this way, Games Masters should set the expectation at the start of 

The only exception to this guideline is where a character gains 
the campaign and not veer from it. 

an additional roll (or suffers a reduction in rolls) for their Experi- 
ence Modifier as described on page 9. This modifier should only be 
permitted in situations where the character can put their influence InNcCrREeaASsIinNgG CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCcSs 
to good use or suffer its consequences, such as returning home at A creature’s rolled characteristics are regarded as its peak nat- 
the conclusion of a scenario. Thus it is not intended that the bonus ural development, a combination of its birth and environment as 
should be applied at the end of each and every session, especially it was growing. Thus just as some horses are bigger, stronger and 
when the characters are isolated or exploring off in the wilderness. tougher than others, humans and other sapient species can grow up 

Experience Rolls do not need to be used there and then. They to exhibit fairly diverse physical and mental characteristics. 
can be reserved for future use at the player’s discretion. The main Characteristics can, like skills, be improved through Experience 
reasons for reserving use of a roll are: Rolls, which represent training regimes. However, such increases are 

artificial boosts which normally atrophy after the training exercises 
& To increase Characteristics 

cease, characteristics dropping back to their natural levels whether 
& To buy new Professional Skills 

the workouts were daily calisthenics sessions to increase CON or 
& To put towards developing a new magical Tradition (explained 

memory tests to enhance INT. 
in the Introduction to Magic chapter). 

To achieve and maintain characteristic increases requires that a 
character reduce his regular allotment of Experience Rolls by one or 
more points. This represents the continual and intensive effort spent 

InNcCrREeaASsIinNgG EXxIisStTiInNgG SKkIiLlLlSs 
to push his body beyond its normal capability. 

Any skill on the character sheet, Standard or Professional, can be 
Each Experience Roll sacrificed in this manner boosts the trained 

increased by spending one Experience Roll. 
characteristic by one tenth of its rolled species maximum. Thus a 

& The player rolls 1d100 and compares it to the skill being human who engaged in regular weightlifting to build up his STR 

increased. The character’s INT is added to the roll. could, at the cost of reducing his normal allotment of Experience 

& If the number rolled is equal to or greater than the skill being Rolls by one, gain +2 points to his Strength. A minotaur on the other 

improved it increases by 1d4+1%. hand would gain +3 points to Strength as his species maximum is 

& If the number rolled is less than the skill selected, the skill still 24. 

increases but only by 1%. When a characteristic increases, all attributes and skills derived 

& If a character fumbled any skill during the course of the from it increase too (if the characteristic increase is enough to create 

preceding session(s) — i.c., between the last set of Experience an attribute change). Thus, increasing STR by one point will also 

Rolls and the present one — the fumbled skill gains a free increase each skill that uses it as a component by one point too. In 

increase of 1%. It is a truism that we learn more from our addition Damage Modifier may also increase if the new STR value 

mistakes than our successes, and this represents the reflection moves the character into the next Damage Modifier band. 
No matter how much training is undertaken, no characteristic 

can exceed its species maximum — which is simply the highest pos- 
FRrEeEeLlyY ImMpPrRoOVvIinNgG SKkIiLlLlSs 

Normally players have full discretion over which skills to improve, sible result from the characteristic roll. Once the character decides 

no matler thewr location or circumstances. Sometimes, however; it may be to cease his exercise regime, his trained characteristic drops by one 

unrealistic for a character to practice Lockpicking when he is currently on improvement step the next time he receives Experience Rolls, and 

a ship, and has done nothing butf ight sea monsters for the last few game again the following time, the atrophying continuing until the charac- 

sessions. teristic has returned to its natural value. 

In such cases it 1s reasonable for the Games Masters to request that SIZ is the exception to the above rules. It cannot be increased 

characters only attempt to improve skills which they have recently used, or through mundane means. 

Jor which the situation exists to practice them. For example, if the ship- 
bound character arrives at a civilised port it is quate likely he can find a InNcCrREeaASsIinNgG PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 
local thieves’ guald or locksmath with whom he can practice. As described under Passions on page 82, the value of a passion 

Some caution s required that the Games Master is not too restrictive, may be increased with Experience Rolls in exactly the same way as 
as this can lead to a bias in a subset of those skills which are most oflen a skill. If supported by play, the Games Master might even allow a 
used in his campaign, leading to disproportionate character development. passion to be reduced by the use of an Experience Roll. 
Instead, if a character wishes to improve unusual skills, the Games Mas- Tor example, constant spurning from an unrequited love might 
ter should use thus to create a roleplaying opportunity or an eventual subplot eventually wear down the passion of even the most ardent lover, 
\ Jfor hus campaign. r especially one who wishes to pursue a relationship without the ghosts 

of the past haunting them. 

72



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

TRrAaIinNIinNgG ImMpPrRoOvVeEmMEenNTt TAaBbLlEe 
PEerRmMAaNnEeNnTt CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIicC ImMpPrRoOvVeEmMEenNTt 

Degree of Difference Skill Improves By 
Some players may bemoan the significant and continual costs of 

characteristic improvement. In these cases the Games Master can ignore 21-30% 1d2 

a certain level of realism, and instead focus on_fun, allowing permanent 31-40% 1d3 

characteristic boosts for a one-off Experience Roll cost. 41-50% 1d4 

This method must be treated with a degree of caution howeven; since 51-60% 1d6 

not all Games Masters reward players with the samef requency or number 61-70% 1d6+1 

of Experience Rolls; thus the default costs may be too cheap or expensive. 71-80% 1d6+2 

Additionally games where characteristic improvement 1s too prevalent can 
81-90% 1d6+3 

quickly lead to many characters with identical attributes, each tweaked to 
91-100% 1d6+4 

lake advantage of natural break points within the system. 
Each 10% +1 

Thef ollowing method utilises the current and minimum characteristic 
values so that it scales for all creatures. Although it sometimes throws up 
an oddity between characteristics rolled on different dice, this should be TRrAaIinNEeRrSs 
considered a feature of that particular species. Since most creatures are A trainer is someone who works with the character, helping them 
generated using no more than three or four dice, this method remains both to practice a particular skill hoping, through coaching and mento- 
simple and comparatively fai: ring, to improve the character’s skill. Characters can act as trainers 

Cost to increase a characteristic by one point = 1+creature’s current for other characters but it is usual to seek out someone who, through 
characteristic value, minus the species minimum,_for that characteristic years of specialised study and greater experience, has more benefits 

Thus a human with DEX 12 would need to invest 10 Experience and insight to offer. 
Rolls (15— 3) to raise DEX to 13. A trainer must have at least 20% more than the character in 

the skill being trained, and the degree of improvement rests on the 
N - difference: 

TEeaACcHhEeRrSs 
LeEaArRnNIinNgG NEewW SKkIiLlLlSs A teacher is a professional trainer who possesses the Teach skill, 

Some characters may wish to study new Professional skills which using it to improve the quality of his tuition. They utilise the same 

they never had the chance to learn from their culture or career. Training Chart above, but modify the amount increased according 

Before they can start investing Experience Rolls they must first find to the result of a Teach roll: 

a source of knowledge from which to learn. This could be as pro- 
& Critical Success: Skill improvement increases by two Training 

saic as a professional tutor such those provided by cults or brother- 
steps 

hoods. Alternately it might be a more exotic source of education, an 
& Success: Skill improvement increases by one Training step 

ancient and crumbling training scroll or an ancestor spirit bound to 
& Failure: No effect on improvement 

the community’s sacred stone tiki. 
& Fumble: Skill improvement decreases by one Training step, 

Once a source of education is found, the character must spend 
which may result in the character gaining no improvement 

an entire month of study and practice to garner a basic grounding in 
through the training 

that skill. This costs 3 Experience Rolls plus whatever in-game costs 
are required to pay the teacher (if one exists), and purchase (or rent) 
whatever equipment and tools may be needed. LimiiTts tToO TRrAaIinNIinNgG 

Training comes with some limitations: 

TRrAaIinNIinNgG & Only one skill at a time can be trained. 
Skills can be improved without expending Experience Rolls, & A trained skill must be next improved using an Experience 

through help of a mentor; either a trainer or a teacher. Roll; it cannot benefit from the training procedure again until 
Characters must spend one full week in training to benefit from it has been increased in this way. 

a training increase. At the end of the training period the skill being & Trainers can only tutor a single student at a time, whereas 
trained improves by the die roll indicated on the Training Chart, teachers may educate multiple students at once. As a guide, 
with any modifiers due to the Teaching skill. divide the trainer’s Teaching skill by 10 to determine how 

How much a mentor charges for his services depends very much many students that teacher is prepared to train at one time. 
on the nature of the campaign and the setting. They might accept 
manual labour or favours in return for training, or insist on hard 

Cuurlrts aAnNDd BRrOoTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 
coin. In the case of abstract promises the Games Master must set the 

Cults and guilds may offer training at a reduced cost, or free 
terms and the character should meet them, or else face some form 

of charge, to their members. The training costs outlined earlier are 
of consequence if they are not met. 

therefore considered a standard guide; cult or brotherhood mem- 
In terms of hard coin, a week’s training costs 1 Silver Piece for 

bers may be offered a reduced rate, but this may be dependent on 
every 5% the mentor has in the skill he is training. If he also knows 

rank and standing within the organization. The Games Master may 
how to teach, this amount increases by 1 silver piece for each 10% he 

need to set these limits. 
has in the Teach skill. So, a mentor with 70% in Lore (History) could 
charge 14 SP; or 19 SP if he also had Teach 50%. 

73



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Tired of having sand kicked in herface by Xenos during combat training, 

Anathaym decides that she needs to be as strong as her hated rival, so that she 
can properly humiliate him the next time they face off in the sparring circle. 
With her STR 11, SIZ 10, and no Damage Modifier she is at a significant 
disadvantage, especially when wrestling 

Thus Anathaym throws herself body and soul into a punishing training 
schedule, her player deciding that she’ll use all three of Anathaym’s regularly 
assigned Experience Rolls to increase her STR. She boosts her characteristic 
by +6 but at the expense of consuming all herf ree time (preventing any other 
skall improvements to be made). The Games Master also rules that it takes six 
weeks of campaign time_for her to achweve this new strength. 

When Anathaym next turns up at the combat school, Xenos inevitably 
makes some_foul comment concerning her new ‘manliness’ which she seizes 
upon to challenge hum. The arrogant noble insultingly looks her muscular 
Plysique up and down (STR 17), then offers to arm-wrestle with her. How- 
eve, although her Damage Modifier s now in partty with Xenos® (+1d2) she 
stll loses the match, her rival being slightly more experienced in applying his 
Brawn in these tests of machismo. 

Anathaym rages at her humiliating defeat, but master Samothis approaches 
has student and sardonically suggests that if she spent time actually practicing 
her combat skills instead of turning herself into an ox, she might actually 
simply punch out her opponent the next time. Anathaym hears the wisdom in 
has words and ceases her weightlifling, planning to invest some of her future 
Experience Rolls in becoming more skilful in unarmed combat. 

Following the advice of amotlus, Anathaym seeks out her mentor to be 
schooled in the art of unarmed combat. In her single-mindedness to become 
an expert of the Meerish Infantry combat style, her Unarmed skill has lan- 
guished at a mere 37 %. Master Zamothus on the other hand is an expert with 
85%, and a Teach skill of 79%. 

Afier ten days of intensive training Anathaym benefits greatly from her 
Diisease AanNDd POo1isSoOnN mentor’s wisdom. The difference in skill between them is 48% which on the 

Some of the most feared things which can affect characters are Training Chart table normally results in a 1d4 bonus. However, Zamothis 
the myriad diseases and poisons which infest the dark and grim also critically succeeds his Teach roll, increasing the table result by two steps. 
places of the world. There’s nothing quite as unsettling than a plague T s boosts the improvement roll to 1d6+1, andf rom this Anathaym gains 
which strikes the character’s home city, especially when they are still 5%, raising her Unarmed skill to 42% - well worth every bruuse. 
within its gates. Likewise finding a venomous serpent in the bed or 
being attacked by giant scorpions can be moments of high drama. 

Diseases and poisons are near infinite in their varieties but, for 
Resustance: How the disease or poison is resisted — either Endur- 

game purposes, arc handled in the same way. 
ance or Willpower, but may have more exotic resistance require- 
ments. Resistance can be rolled at the time of exposure, or deferred 

DiisseeaasseeE AanNDd POoii1ssoOnN TRrAaIiTtSs until the Onset Time to conceal the fact the character might have 
All diseases and poisons manifest a number of traits important been infected or poisoned. 

to their effects. Onset Time: Many diseases and poisons do not take immediate 
Application: 'The method of how the disease or poison is intro- effect. The delay is called the Onset Time, and this can be a matter 

duced into the victim. of seconds, minutes, hours, or even longer. Poisons or diseases pos- 
sessing multiple effects may have different onset times for each one 

& Ingestion - Effects take place through either eating or drinking. 
as described under Conditions. 

& Inhaled — Effects take place through breathing or snorting, 
Duration: How long a disease or poison’s Conditions last. 

& Contact — Effects take place through absorption through the 
Conditions: Every toxin has one or more Conditions. These have 

skin. 
specific effects as described in the Conditions table, below, and if a 

& Injected — Effects take place when the substance is injected 
victim fails to resist he suffers all the Conditions described. 

into the body through piercing. 
Antidote/Cure: If the toxin can be treated it will be noted here. 

Potency: The virulence of the disease or poison. This value is set Otherwise all non-magical diseases and poisons can be alleviated 

against an appropriate resisting skill (usually Endurance or Will- by specific healing magic, such as the Cure Malady spell. Success- 

power) in an opposed roll. If character wins the roll they shrug off ful treatment prevents any further conditions from occurring, yet in 

its effects. If however they lose the roll, then they suffer all of the some circumstances may leave the victim suffering enduring effects 

disease or poison Conditions, each at the appropriate time. that have already been inflicted. 

74



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

Diisease aAnNDd PoiisonN COoNnDdIiTtIioONnSs 

Condition Effects 

Victim is hindered by intense pain. Whether in a location or the entire body, any skill roll involving use of the affected area must also be less or equal to 

Agony the character’s Willpower, otherwise the attempt fails, and they moan or scream in pain. 

Victim suffers asphyxiation — he collapses incapacitated, unable to breathe. The rules for Asphyxiation, found on page 71, are used. Asphyxiation may 

Asphyxiation be asthmatic in nature meaning the victim only suffers shortness of breath, or complete respiratory failure resulting in death. In the later case a victim 

can be kept alive by winning an opposed test of the First Aid skill against the Potency of the diease or poison. 

Bleeding Victim suffers from either internal bleeding or surface haemorrhaging which leads to the effects described in the Blood Loss section on page 71. 

Blindness Victim becomes blind. 

Confusion Victim cannot use any knowledge, communication or magic skill. 

Clontagious Victim can transfer the poison or disease by touch. 

Deafness Victim loses his hearing, 

Death Victim collapses incapacitated, and dies after a number of rounds equal to his CON characteristic. 

Dumbness Victim’s vocal chords are paralysed, preventing verbal communication. 

Exhaustion Victim gains an extra level of Fatigue, on top of any they are currently suffering from. 

Fever Victim’s body temperature fluctuates wildly — from hot to cold — and muscles ache. All skills suffer a difficulty grade of Hard. 

Victim experiences delusions and cannot differentiate between real and imaginary experiences. His skill and abilities are unaffected but his ability to 

Hallucinations relate to the real world is seriously impaired. Under its effects the sufferer tends to experience visions related to his strongest Passions, and any skeletons 

kept in the cupboard, often leading to irrational acts. 

Maiming Victim suffers a permanent loss of 1 Hit Point in the location(s) affected, due to necrosis of the injured tissue. 

P Victim is driven to follow some compulsion; such as avoiding water, paranoia, self mutilation, and so forth. The mania induced by the disease or poison 

- will be noted in its description. 

Victim cannot eat, and must roll against his Endurance every time he performs a stressful physical action to avoid being physically sick. Vomiting lasts 

Nausea for 1d3 rounds during which he cannot act. Long durations of Nausea may cause starvation. 

P Victim is unable physically to move. The affected area, if a location, cannot be used for the duration. If it affects the whole body, the character cannot 

e move at all. 

Savni Victim has their Magic Points (either the Attribute or current number) reduced. Apply the Potency of the disease or poison on the Spirit Damage table 

ppms (page 131) to calculate the dice roll used. Lost Magic Points do not recover until the duration ends. 

Unconscious Victim loses consciousness for a period specified in the description. When consciousness is regained the victim suffers a level of Fatigue. 

Application: Injected 
SaAmMPpLlEe DIiSsEeAaSsEeSs 

Potency: 80 
These are samples of various diseases encountered during 

Resistance: Endurance 
MyTHRAS play, to be used as they stand or as a template for Games 

Onset time: 1d6+6 days 
Master designed infections. 

Duration: 1 week + 1d3 days 

PYyrRoOHhOoXxIiaA Conditions: Disease manifests with the start of Hallucinations. Afler one 
week they also start to sufferfrom Mania (Fire). If the victim somehow survives 

A rather strange disease, pyrohoxia is carried by feral animals 
lo the conclusion of the disease, they then suffer Death. 

such as rodents, and transferred by a successful bite. The infection 
Antidote/Cure: Can be cured by the Healing skill up until the onset of 

gradually spreads to the brain, where it begins to twist the percep- 
Mania, at which point the disease must be treated magically. 

tions and aggression of the victim. No obvious signs exist of pyro- 
hoxia infection, although the behaviour of the creature which bit 

RedD Pox 
them may offer clues. Within several weeks of the bite the victim 

Red pox is a nasty disease spread by skin contact with a person 
starts to suffer increasingly painful headaches, and the eyes turn 

already infected, or with something they have touched. The chance 
bloodshot. At this point the hallucinations begin, strengthening over 

of catching the disease from an object remains for 1d3 days after 
the course of a week into violent waking nightmares. 

contact, making it quite difficult to contain the disease once an out- 
The victim then passes into the terminal stage of the disease, 

break occurs. 
which induces constant shivering accompanied with a mania to get 

Victims initially suffer a minor rash, but within a day come down 
warm by whatever means possible. Eventually this climaxes with a 

with a serious fever which usually renders them bedridden for the 
suicidal desire to jump into fires, lava or even set themselves alight; 

entire duration. During this time the rash evolves into gruesomely 
usually resulting in a paroxysm of violent destruction as they burn 

itchy pustules which burst open at the slightest movement, weeping 
to death. Even if restrained from self-immolation, the victim dies 

small trickles of blood — especially from the armpits and groin. This 
from brain swelling. 

stage can last up to a week or more, potentially proving fatal. 

75



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

Application: Contact Likewise, each day of Necrosis suffered before successful treatment inflicts per- 
Potency: 50 manent damage. 
Resistance: Endurance 
Onset time: 1d6+6 hours Lotus Duusst 
Duration: 1d6+35 days Lotus dust is the natural pollen produced by the blossom of the 

Conditions: Once the disease manifests the victim becomes Contagious. 1 day rare and deadly ebony lotus flower, which grows in the depths of 

later they begin to suffer Fever and Bleeding. Each day the pustules weep blood remote jungles. It takes the form of a fine yellowish powder with a 

the victim loses one level of Fatigue, which does not recover until the duration of sweet, cloying scent; although to smell it is death since the pollen in 

the disease has completed. its natural state is lethal when inhaled or tasted, causing the heart of 

Antidote/Cure: Can be cured by the Healing skill. the victim to burst. Whether from fear or ecstasy is unknown, for few 
beings ever survive long enough to tell. 

SouLl LeechH Despite its dangers many sorcerers breathe the fumes of burning 
Dreaded by priests, shamans and sorcerers alike, soul leech drains lotus dust, which instead of bringing near instant death, infuses the 

their magical vitality, reducing them to powerless prestidigitators. mind of the imbiber with fantastical visions of other worlds. It is 
Although the disease starts with an innocuous enough cough com- said that they learn dark secrets from the euphoric dreams, though 
bined with a degree of lassitude, it soon becomes apparent that their few have the strength of will to extract themselves from such visions. 
paranormal strength is ebbing when spells tire them more easily. Application: Inhaled 

The only extraneous sign of this weakening is that the victim’s Potency: 90 
own web of subcutaneous veins begins to glow a faint purple when Resustance: Willpower 
examined in pitch darkness, a by-product of the disease consuming Onset time: 1d3 rounds 
their Magic Points. Magicians suffering this malady often try to bluff Duration: Instantaneous in its natural state, 2d6 hours if smoked 
through their lack of power hoping that the disease will end before Conditions: Death if natural pollen. Paralysis and Hallucinations if 
arival can take advantage. smoked. At the end of a narcotic dream, the smoker must make another resistance 

Application: Inhaled 10ll otherwise subside into an endless coma, still trapped within his lucid visions. 
Potency: 65 Antidote/Cure: Can be treated by an infusion of the rare Golden Lotus which 
Resistance: Endurance brings complete recovery, otherwise magic must be used. 
Onset time: 1d6 days 
Duration: 1d3+3 weeks SLleEeEpPiInNgG DRrAaUuGgHhTt 
Conditions: Sapping Each week the victim reduces his Magic Points attribute Sleeping draughts are often used to capture or rob characters, 

by 1d6 points. Since these do not recover until the disease ends, a magician can who unwittingly imbibe the tasteless concoction hidden in a mug of 

eventually be reduced to a level of uiter powerlessness. Afler the disease concludes, ale or glass of wine. By the time the character awakens, they are usu- 

the Magic Points attribute recovers at a rate of 1 point per day. ally weak and nauseous — if not from the after-effects of the sleeping 

Antidote/Cure: Can be cured by the Healing skill if rare, mystical ingredi- draught, then due to the alcoholic hangover which accompanied it. 

ents (the precise nature of which depends on the setting) are used. Application: Ingested 
Potency: 60 
Resustance: Willpower 

SaAmMPpLlEe POoIisSoONnSs 
Onset time: 1d6+4 minutes 

CooBbRraA VEenNoOmM 
Perhaps the quintessential venomous snake, a cobra’s venom has 

several effects depending on its application. If injected via bite, the 
venom will inflict a burning pain shortly followed by respiratory dif- 
ficulty which can lead to death. Even surviving a cobra bite comes 
at a horrible cost, the bitten area suffering permanent necrotic dam- 
age. If the venom is spat at the eyes instead of respiratory paralysis 
the venom can often inflict permanent blindness. 

Application: Contact (eyes) or Injected 
Potency: 75 
Resistance: Endurance 
Onset time: Instant if spat in eyes, 1d6+4 minutes if bitten 
Duration: 1d3+35 days 
Conditions: If spat into the eyes both Agony and Blindness are instant, last- 

ing the entire duration. Butten victims also begin with Agony but can struggle 
along until 1d6+06 hours afler the bite when Asphyxiation strikes, usually result- 
ing in death, unless Furst Aid us successfully applied to keep the victim breathing. 
Survivors will then suffer Necrosis, losing 1 Hit Pownt per day from the location 
bitten, until the venom s somehow purged or it naturally ends. 

Antidote/Cure: Can be ameliorated with the Healing skill. However blind- 
ness, if not treated before the end of the venom’s duration becomes permanent. Envenomed blades: a favourite of every assassin 

76



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

Duration: 1d6+3 hours ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Conditions: Unconsciousness. Victim falls into a deep sleep, and cannot be Anathaym owns a partial suit of bronze Hoplite Plate. This comprises 

woken until the duration ends. a crested helm, a cuirass and two bracers. The panoply covers five of her 
Antidote/Cure: Can be counteracted by the Healing skill, and use of a strong body locations, and has an Armour Penalty of -4 which counts both against 

stimulant. her Initiative, and her running and sprinting speeds due to the hindrance the 
strapped preces have on her body movement. 

Additionally the armour has a total ENC of 20 simply due to the weight 

EnNCcuUMmBbRrAaNnCcEe of the heavy bronze. If she carried the armour on her back, whilst also bear- 
ing her spear;, shorisword and hoplite shield, Anathaym would have a total 

Encumbrance represents both the mass and bulk of an item. The 
Encumbrance of 20+2+1+5=26 which s more than twice her STR of 

greater the encumbrance value the more difficult it is to carry it. 
11, rendering her Burdened. 

Correlating ENC with SIZ can be a challenge: light but bulky 
However, if she wears her armour instead, the ENC of the panoply s 

items often impose just as much of a burden as small but heavy ones. 
halved, reducing her total Encumbrance to 10+2+1+5 =16, leaving her a 

As a rule of thumb 3 ENC is equivalent to 1 SIZ, but, depending on 
little extra capacity to carry extra equipment, and not be hindered by her load. 

the item, Games Masters may want to adjust the ratio down to 2:1 
or even l:1. A head-sized lump of lead, for instance, is far heavier 
than a similar sized lump of rock. Conversely a large sack loosely The amount armour counts towards Encumbrance Capacity 

filled with goose-down might have a ratio of 5:1. As always, com- depends on whether it is worn or carried. 

mon sense should prevail in such circumstances. 
& When worn, only half the total ENC of the armour is 

Items that have a zero ENC value are, on their own, inconse- 
counted towards Encumbrance 

quential; however consider that 20 zero ENC items equal 1 ENC. 
& When carried, the full ENC value of the armour is counted 

towards Encumbrance 
EnNCcuUMmBbRrAaNnCcEe CAaPpAaCcIiTtYy 

Characters can carry a total ENC equal to their STR x2 with 
relative ease. Everyday clothing does not contribute to this capacity, NoNn HUuMmAaNn EnNCcuUMmBbRrAaNnCcEe 
but armour does — see the notes on Armour ENC below. Whilst the encumbrance rules work fine for human scaled charac- 

If the total ENC borne exceeds STR x2 then the character is ters, they can begin to break down for creatures of larger or smaller 
considered to be Burdened. This has the following effects: dimensions. The best way to avoid scaling issues is to assume that 

arms and equipment for each species scale in proportion with their 
& Skills using STR or DEX as part of their base (including 

user’s size. Thus a great axe used by a minotaur would be slightly 
combat skills) become one grade harder 

larger than one used by a (human) royal guard, as would its armour. 
& Base Movement Rate drops by 2 metres, and the character 

To calculate the encumbrance of proportionally sized equip- 
can no longer sprint 

ment, add together all the ENC values of everything carried by the 
& Carrying the load counts as Medium activity for Fatigue 

creature, then multiply the final result by the ratio of the average SIZ 
purposes 

of a member of that race divided by the average SIZ of a human. 

If the borne ENC exceeds STR x3 then the character is consid- 

ered to be Overloaded. The effects are thus: Final Encumbrance = Total ENC x (Average SIZ of species/13) 

& Skills using STR or DEX as part of their base (including 
combat skills) become two grades harder 

& Base Movement Rate drops to half normal, and the character ALlTtEeRrNnAaTtIiVvEe EnNCcuUMmBbRrAaNnCcEe RUuLlEeSs 
cannot move faster than a walk Keeping detailed track of encumbrance adds considerable effort to maintaining 

& Carrying the load counts as Strenuous activity for Fatigue character sheets, especially when items are picked up or looted, and as a consequence 

purposes many groups simply hand-wave encumbrance as being an unnecessary hassle in general 

play. For those who still wish to keep a rough track of encumbrance but want something 

Characters cannot carry a total ENC more than their STR x4, less maths intensive, consider the following alternative, which does not track items car- 

cither the mass or unwieldy bulk of the objects proving to be too ried in strict terms of their ENC value. 
much to bear for more than a short distance. 

& All characters can carry a number of Items equal to half their STR without 

being encumbered. Over STR/2 and up to STR, they are considered Bur- 

ARrmMOoUuRr ENC dened. Over STR to STRx1.5 they are Qverloaded. 

When considering its encumbering nature, armour has a num- One Item is equivalent to anything that can be comfortably carried in one hand. 

ber of different effects: it not only hinders Initiative (see Armour Things that are two-handed or are strapped to an arm (a shield, say) count as 

Penalty), and slows gaits faster than a walk (see Moving in Armour two ltems. Note that the SIS of the creature will influence what is considered 

page 70), but also burdens its bearer with its bulky weight. one or two items. For a giant, a greatsword could comfortably be counted as one 

item, whereas for human-sized creatures it would clearly be two. 

Worn armour of any kind does not contribute towards ENC. If carried, then 

it counts as its equivalent Armour Penalty value. 

~ 

77



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

Continuing with the minotaur example, we find its proportional equal to the Damage Taken column of the Falling Distance 
size ratio is 1.7 (22/13). Thus a minotaur wearing full Hoplite pan- including any reductions for objects of smaller size. 
oply and wielding its great axe would have a total encumbrance of 
27 (28 halved plus 2 for the great axe, and the total multiplied by 

FaALlLliInNgG fFrRoOmM Aa 
1.7) Still well within the unburdened limit of STRx2 which for an 
average minotaur is 34. MOoVvIiNnGg VEeHhIiCcLlEe 

Although this sum may require a few seconds to work out, it Damage sustained from a fall from a moving vehicle, such as 
simplifies the entire process to a single calculation, and avoids time a chariot, depends on the vehicle’s speed and the distance fallen. 
consuming book keeping. Assume that the speed, in metres per Combat Round, is equal to 

half the height shown on the Falling Distance table. A chariot mov- 
ing at 20m per Combat Round would inflict 2d6 damage to two 

FaALlLliInNgG random locations if a character should fall from it. 

The amount of damage suffered in a fall depends on the distance 
of the drop. Armour points do not reduce falling damage. 

FaAtTiIgGuUEe 
FaALlLliInNgG DiiSstTaAnNCcEe TAaBbLlEe 

Fatigue measures tiredness and its incremental effects. It is an 
Distance Fallen Damage Taken important aspect in MYTHRAS as it is used to track many different 
Im orless No damage. things from strenuous activity to the debilitating effects of disease 
2m to Sm 1d6 points of damage to a random location. or magic. 
6m to 10m 2d6 points of damage to two random locations. 

Ilmto 15m 3d6 points of damage to three random locations. PHhYySsIicCaALl EFffFoORrTt 
16m to 20m 4d6 points of damage to four random locations. The primary way of accruing Fatigue is by engaging in some 
Each +5m +1d6 damage. form of physical activity. The more arduous the exercise or work, 

the more quickly it tires the character. There are three classes of 
effort: Light, Medium and Strenuous. The length of time a char- 

& Damage is rolled separately for eack location; it is not spread 
acter can engage in an activity without becoming fatigued is deter- 

among them. 
mined by his CON, as detailed under each category. Once this time 

& Creatures of smaller size suffer less from a fall. Those of SIZ 
has elapsed characters must make an appropriate skill roll — either 

8 to 9 treat the distance fallen as one metre less. A creature 
Athletics, Brawn or Endurance — to resist gaining a level of Fatigue. 

of SIZ 6 to 7 treats the distance fallen as three metres less. A 
Unless the recipient of some form of magic that naturally extends 

creature of SIZ 4 to 5 treats the distance fallen as five metres 
wakefulness, all characters need sleep. A character can remain 

less. A creature of SIZ 2 to 3 treats the distance fallen as eight 
awake for a number of hours equal to twice CON before needing to 

metres less. A creature of SIZ 1 or less treats the distance 
make an Endurance roll. If successful, the character can continue to 

fallen as ten metres less. 
function normally for a number of hours equal to half CON before 

Creatures of larger size suffer more from a fall. For every 10 
needing to make a further Endurance roll, although this roll will be 

points above SIZ 20 the creature adds +1d6 to the damage. 
one grade harder than the last. Each failed roll accrues one level of 

Thus a SIZ 35 creature which drops from a height of 2m 
fatigue. 

would take 3d6 damage to a random location. 
& Acrobatics can be used to mitigate falling damage — a success- 

ful roll allows the character to treat the fall as if it were two EFfFfeCcTtSs oOFf FaAtTiIgGuUEe 
metres shorter than it actually is. In addition, as long as the Every failed roll accrues a level of Fatigue. Each level of Fatigue 
roll is successful and the character does not suffer a Serious carries penalties for skill use, movement, Initiative and Action Points. 
or Major wound due to the fall, the character lands relatively Asphyxiation, Blood Loss, and some types of magic also contribute 
safely and is not prone. to Fatigue accrual. 
Characters falling onto soft surfaces may treat the distance For most characters, activities of any kind become near impos- 
they fall as halved for the purposes of damage. This is always sible when the level of Incapacitated is reached. At this stage the 
at the Games Master’s discretion. character is still conscious but incapable of anything but the most 
Characters falling onto damaging surfaces (such as a pit of desperate of activities. 
spikes) will suffer the effects of the surface to all locations that Beyond Incapacitated, characters cannot act at all. The Fatigue 
are damaged in the fall. levels — Semi-Conscious, Comatose and Dead — are generally 

reserved for measuring the most extreme effects of suffocation, dis- 
case, blood loss, starvation, exposure, and so forth. 

FaALlLliInNgG OBbJjEeCcTtSs It is perfectly possible to accrue Fatigue from several sources, 

A falling object imparts an amount of damage based on its SIZ potentially making some situations more dangerous. 

and the distance of the fall. An object imparts 1d6 damage for every For example, a thief climbs the flanks of an extinct volcano to reach a 

6 points of SIZ (or fraction thereof), plus an amount of damage long-forgotten temple, in which fantastically precious jewels are reputed to be 
hidden. By the time he crests the crater rim his Fatigue level has reached Tured. 
Spurred on by sighting the ruins upon an island at the centre of the flooded 

78



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

FaATtiIgGuUEe LEeVvEeLlSs 

Skill Grade Initiative Action Points Recovery Period 

Fresh No Penalties 

Winded Hard No Penalty No Penalty No Penalty 15 minutes 

Tired Hard -1 metre No Penalty No Penalty 3 hours 

Wearied Formidable -2 metres -2 No Penalty 6 hours 

Exhausted Formidable Halved -4 -1 12 hours 

Debilitated Herculean Halved -6 -2 18 hours 

Incapacitated Herculean Immobile -8 -3 24 hours 

Semi-Conscious Hopeless No Activities Possible No Activities Possible No Activities Possible 36 hours 

Comatose No Activities Possible No Activities Possible No Activities Possible No Activities Possible 48 hours 

Dead Dead Never 

PHhYySsIicCaALl EFffFoORrTt TAaBbLlEe types of activity contribute towards Fatigue. But common sense 
should apply. A character dressed in full plate armour, in a tropical 

How 

Effort Long? Example Skill Roll jungle, on a hot summer’s day, could not spend three hours hack- 
ing his way through the foliage without suffering fatigue in some 

Very Easy grade roll vs 
way. Similarly carrying heavy loads, trekking uphill, foot chases, long 

Activity that places either Athletics, Brawn 
swims or digging out an ancient necropolis are all going to take their 

. no strain on the or Endurance according 
i CON in . 

Light b body. All reasonable  to the task (Athletics for toll on a character, potentially tiring him at a crucial moment. 
ours 

activities at a steady exercise; Brawn for heavy 

pace. lifting; Endurance for 

general activities). 
FIirREeSs 

i Manual labour; 
i CON in i i As above, but at Easy Fires are always a source of danger when used as a weapon or 

Medium . sustained physical 
minutes i grade. rage out of control. They damage both people and objects; how 

exercise. 
much is dependent on the intensity of the source. The Fire Inten- 

. Standard grade roll vs 
CON in i i i sity table below gives five different intensities for heat damage, with 

Combat; struggling either Athletics, Brawn 
seconds . . some examples. 

against the elements;  or Endurance according 
(rounded up . L . The damage inflicted per round is given in the Damage column. 

Strenuous physical activity in to the task (Athletics for 
to the next . Being relatively small, Intensity 1 and 2 sources apply their damage 

extremely adverse exercise; Brawn for heavy 
Combat i e to a single Hit Location, usually that touching the source. Intensity 

circumstances. lifting; Endurance for 
Round) 

Combat). 3 and 4 sources are larger, applying damage to nearest 1d4+1 Hit 
Locations, indicating the degree of radiant heat. Intensity 5 sources 
affect all Hit Locations simultaneously. 

Fire clearly has the ability to ignite flammable materials. If not 

caldera, the thieff oolishly undertakes the swim before resting; in the process losing extinguished immediately such materials combust within a number 

several more levels of Fatiguefromf ailed Swim rolls. When the scaly guardian of of rounds as indicated by the fire’s Intensity. Once ignited, flamma- 

the sacred temple pulls him under the surface, the fatigue accrualfrom drowning ble materials burn until physically extinguished. Damage is applied 

startsfrom has current level of Exhausted, and he swiftly dies, lacking the energy directly to the Hit Points of the material, ignoring Armour Points 

to put up much of a fight. and to any flesh beneath. If left uncontrolled it spreads to a number 
of Hit Locations, per round, equal to its Intensity. 

REeCcOoVvEeRrIinNgG fFrRoOmM FaATtiIgGuUEe 
Characters recover from Fatigue depending on their Healing FIirReE InNTtEeNnSsIitTyY TAaBbLlEe 

Rate. The amount of complete rest needed to recover from each Intensity Examples Time to Ignite Damage 
level of accrued Fatigue is equal to the Recovery Period divided by 

1 Candle 1d4 1d2 
the character’s Healing Rate. 

2 Torch 1d3 1d4 
Note that the table represents fatigue recovery for physical exer- 

3 Campfire 1d2 1d6 
tion. Fatigue recovery can be much faster when recovering from 
asphyxiation or slower if recuperating from blood loss. Room filling 

4 . 1d2 2d6 
conflagration 

5 Volcanic lava Instant 3d6 
MAaNnAaGgIiNnGg FaAtTiIgGuUEe 

Managing Fatigue, and its effects makes for additional book-keep- 
ing. To simplify things, Games Masters can decide that only certain 

79



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

PEerRmMAaNnEeNnTt InNjJuUrRyY TAaBbLlEe 
HEeAaLlIinNgG fFrRoOmM InNjJuUrRyY 

1d3 Hit Point Reduction Maiming Result 
Natural healing from wounds and injuries is based on the charac- 

If a limb, this represents the maiming 
ter’s Healing Rate. The Healing Rate dictates how many Hit Points 

of a hand or foot. If the head, the 
are recovered in a location depending on the injury’s nature: Character permanently . 

i . character loses one of his sensory 
1 loses one third of the Hit 

& Minor Wounds: Days L. . organs, eye, ear, nose or tongue 
Points in that location . . . 

& Serious Wounds: Weeks Anywhere else it denotes a disfiguring 

scar. 
& Major Wounds: Months 

o q A limb is maimed from the elbow or 
aracter permanen 

Thus a character with a Healing Rate of 3 who suffers damage 1D Y knee down. The head loses two sensory 
loses two thirds of the Hit . 

taking him to —3 in a Hit Location, a Serious Wound, will heal nat- . i organs. Torso exhibits a gruesomely 
Points in that location i 

urally at a rate of 3 Hit Points per week until his wound goes above horrible scar. 

zero, and then heal 3 Hit Points per day until fully recovered. Limbs are maimed from the shoulder 

There are certain restrictions on natural healing: or hip down. The head either loses 

L. three sensory organs, half the face or 
& The healing character cannot engage in strenuous activity: Location is reduced to a L 

3 . A the entire jaw. Chest or abdomen shows 
otherwise the Healing Rate is reduced by 1d3. Thus, a char- single Hit Point . . 

such a horrific scar or deformation 
acter recovering from even a Minor Wound could find his nobody seeing the healed wound can 
progress halted if he decides to engage any physical tasks that comprehend how the victim survived. 
might exacerbate his injuries. 

& Natural healing will not begin to heal a Major Wound until 
that location has been treated with a successful Healing roll 
(see page 46). Non-dismembering Major Wounds which are struck there means the attack actually misses! Characters vindictive 
not treated within a number of days equal to one twentieth of enough to target such a maimed limb using Choose Location must 
the Healing skill become maimed, permanently reducing the roll a 1d3 to see if they actually hit the remaining parts. 
Hit Points of the location. 

Guidance on how to stage combat to take into account these 
ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 

lengthy healing times is provided in the Games Mastery chapter (see Afier months of practice Anathaym finally succeeds in defeating Xenos in 
Pacing Combat Encounters page 285). the practice circle, humiliating the proud noble by tripping him, and_forcing 

has surrender at spear point in_front of his freends. She spends that evening 

MAaGgIiCcAaLl HEeAaLlIinNgG Joolishly drinking wine in celebration. When she eventually leaves the tavern, 

Some magic can heal the wounds suffered by a victim. Yet there the warriwress s too drunk to notice the sinuster cloaked figures who follow, 

are specific restrictions as to what level of wound can be treated by and drag her into a dark alleyway. 

each spell. For example the Common Magic spell Heal cures only Wihilst two of her assaullers pin her down, the third draws a club which 

Minor Wounds, whereas the Sorcery spell of Regeneration can heal he smashes down onto her spear hand, twice, pulping every bone in the append- 

both Minor and Serious Wounds. There are few magics which can age. Then, the men pick her up, laughing cruelly, and Anathaym recognises the 

reverse the traumatic injuries of a Major Wound. superctlious voice of her rwval as she passes out. When she finally awakens 

No matter how petty the healing spell or miracle, its application she discovers herself abandoned in the dry hills many leagues from Meeros. 

is always enough to stabilise any type of wound, preventing bleeding Sufferingfrom the pain and delirium of the Major Wound, 1t takes four 

and immediate death even if it doesn’t actually cure the underlying days to stumble back to Meeros, but shef inally reaches the city’s modest Shrine 

injury. Note that this only applies to gross physical trauma, not to of Healing, located in the poor quarter. The serving acolyte explains that 

conditions brought about by suffocation, poison, and the like. the wound s beyond her powers to heal magically, and too much time has 
already passed to avoid it being maimed. However, she successfully performs 
her Healing roll, ensuring that the hand does not become infected and can start 

PEerRmMAaNnEeNnTt InNJjuURrIiEeSs 
lo recover; albeit with slightly twistedf ingers andf rozen knuckles. 

Some Major Wounds, and certain poisons or diseases inflict 
Anathaym has hitle chowe but to heal naturally. With her right arm at 

maiming injuries; for example horribly crushed and severed limbs, 
-6 1t would normally take a month at her Healing Rate of 3 to recover to 

or the necrotic effects of venoms. The result of this damage perma- 
the point at which the Major Wound s reduced to just a Serious one. The 

nently reduces the Hit Points on that location, forever weakening it. 
mavming injury however; has permanently reduced her limb by two Hit Points. 

Alocation maimed in this way uses the diminished Hit Point value to 
T'us new level means the Serious Wound threshold of that arm is now -1 Hit 

calculate its new Serious and Major Wound thresholds. 
Pownt, so 1t takes two months to recover — at which point another visit to the 

Tor permanent injuries caused by accident or battle, roll 1d3 and 
acolyte magically cures the remaining damage. 

consult the following table to see the extent of the maiming: 
Her right hand crippled to the point of near uselessness, Anathaym is 

In those cases where the maiming involved the loss of a limb, 
drwen by her hatredfor Xenos, and begins to learn how to use her spear left 

reduce the d20 numbers for that Hit Location by an appropriate 
handed... 

amount. For example the Right Arm of a humanoid is normally 
struck on a roll of 13-15 on a d20. If however the arm was sev- 
ered at the elbow then locations 13-14 no longer exist, and being 

o 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

InNaAnNIimMAaTtEe OBbJjEeCcTtSs ARrMmOoUuRr aAnNDd HIiTt POoIiNnTtSs 
InNaAnNIimMAaTtEe OBbJjEeCcTtSs Object Armour Points Hit Points 

All inanimate objects possess Armour Points and Hit Points 
Boulder 10 40 

which are used to determine resistance to damage and destruction. 
Castle gate 8 120 

Armour Points reduce damage before Hit Points are affected. Once 
Castle wall (2m section) 10 250 

an object’s Hit Points have been reduced to zero, it is useless. 
Usually inanimate objects offer no resistance to damage, save for Chain/shackle 8 8 

their Armour Points. However in the case of items that can restrict Club 4 4 

or offer a significant resistance to breakage attempts (such as a Dagger 6 4 

barred door, or ropes used to restrain hands and feet), the character Hut wall (2m section) 3 15 

must succeed with either a Brawn, Unarmed or weapon attack roll, Iron door 12 75 

as appropriate, to inflict damage. A successful roll deals damage to Rope 6 3 
the item as per the weapon type; a failed roll has simply failed to 

War sword 6 10 
apply enough force or damage to the item to deteriorate its condi- 

Wooden chair 2 6 
tion. Refer to the description of the Brawn skill to determine what 

Wooden door (normal) 4 25 
damage it inflicts. 

The Inanimate Objects table gives some example objects, along Wooden door (reinforced) 6 30 

with their Armour Points and Hit Points. Wooden fence (2m section) 4 5 

UssIinNgG WEeAaPpOoNnSs AGgAaIiNnSsTt CHhEeAaTt FaATtEe 
Characters can use a Luck Point to re-roll any dice roll that 

InNaAnNIimMAaTtEe OBbJjEeCcTtSs affects them. This can be a skill roll, damage roll or anything else 
Using a weapon against an inanimate object with Armour Points that has some effect. Characters can even force an opponent to 

equal to or greater than those of the weapon deals damage to both re-roll an attack or damage roll made against them. 
the object and the weapon. For instance, using an axe on an anvil 
may damage the anvil, but the axe itself will be destroyed long DEeSsPpEeRrAaTtEe EFffFoORrTt 
before the anvil is. The Games Master should exercise discretion If a character has exhausted his Action Points during a fight and 
on which weapons or tools can affect which objects. A chisel, for needs to find that last burst of desperate energy to perhaps avoid 
example, is explicitly designed to carve wood or stone whilst a sword, a messy demise, he may spend a Luck Point to gain an additional 
although sharp, is not. The chisel would therefore not take damage Action Point. 
from something it is attempting to carve whereas a sword most likely 
would. MIiTtIigGAaTtEe DAaMmAaGgEe 

A character who suffers a Major Wound may spend a Luck Point 
to downgrade the injury to a Serious Wound. This reduces the dam- 
age taken to one Hit Point less than what would be required to inflict 

Luck POoIiNnTtSs a Major Wound. 
Luck Points help differentiate heroes from the rank and file. They 

represent a character’s ability to potentially turn failure into success, 
Group Luck Points

and even cheat death, roupP OINTS 
The Personal Connections boxed text on page 22 describes how, 

Every character starts with a number of Luck Points as described 
when characters form personal connections during character cre- 

in the Attributes section of the Basic Character Creation chapter. 
ation, the group as a whole gains a pool of Luck Points distinct from 

Luck Points can be used during play and, at the beginning of the 
those available personally. This pool of Group Luck Points is avail- 

next session, replenish to their usual value. 
able to all members of the team to use in precisely the same way as 

For example, Emma and her friends meet every Friday for their weekly 
personal Luck Points but only when the character wanting to draw 

MrTHRAS game. One Friday might Emma, playing Anathaym, is gwen cause to 
upon the pool needs to do so to aid one of his fellows. 

use all her character’s Luck Points for a variety of reasons. Out of Luck Points, 
The Games Master should keep track of the Group Luck Points 

Anathaym manages to survwe with no catastrophic consequences till the end of 
pool (or the players can do this, nominating one of their number to 

the game session. However, when the players reconvene on the following Friday, 
keep track). Group Luck Points refresh in the same way as personal 

Anathaym’s Luck Points will have replenished back to their normal value. 
Luck Points: that is, the pool is fully restored at the beginning of the 

Luck Points only increase if the POW characteristic increases, or 
next game session. However if Games Masters feel that the Group 

some form of magic provides a temporary increase in some fashion. 
Luck Points pool is offering too much of an advantage, or even being 
abused, it can be made to replenish at an appropriate point in the 

UssIinNgG Luck POoIiNnTtSs story — at the end of an adventure for example, or after a reasonable 
Luck points can be used in a variety of ways. Only one Luck period of down-time. 

Point can be used in support of a particular action. Each of the 
following options costs a single Luck Point. 

81



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

For instance, a character with “ITrust Chieftain’ might, if his 
PAaSsSsIioOnNSs chieftain acts treacherously, either reduce his Passion or turn into 

Introduced during the character creation chapters, a Passion ‘Distrust Chieftain’ at the same percentage. The Games Master 
is any deeply held commitment that has the capacity to influence needs to determine if a Passion reduces or reverses. If it reduces 
events during play. Although they can be used as stand-alone abili- then it does so according to the strength of the source of the change. 
ties (to call them skills is to do them a disservice), passions are further The Deepening and Waning table shows by how much the Pas- 
expanded below to explain in more detail how they work, and how sion changes. 
they can influence MYTHRAS characters and campaigns. 

In summary, Passions can be used thus: DEeEePpEeNnIinNgG AanNDd WAaNnIiNnGg 

& To augment another skill, reflecting the depth of one’s feeling Change +/- 

and how it drives action. Weak 1d10 

When used in this regard the Passion adds 20 % of ts value to a skill Moderate 1d10+5 

being used, as long as the augmentation s thematically and dramatically Strong 1d10+10 

important. 
& As an ability in its own right to drive choices, desires, and Further advice for Games Masters on using Passions to drive a 

emotional actions and responses. scenario or campaign is provided in the Games Mastery Chapter. 
When used in this way a standard roll is made against a Passiwn to 

determine how strongly the character thinks andf eels about something If 
a roll s a success then the character acts in-line with what the Passion 
would dictate. If the roll fails then the character can act freely without SUuRrVvIivVaALl 
Jeeling constrained by the Passion’s drives. Characters may find themselves in hostile environments: deserts, 

& To oppose other Passions — even those held by the same char- arctic landscapes, mountains, rain-lashed moorlands, and so on. In 

acter. This is typically used where two Passions would con- such environments characters may find themselves battling the ele- 

flict. For instance a personal love might dictate a course of ments, and the three big killers: exposure, starvation, and thirst. 

action that would be contrary to an oath or loyalty. Here use Each danger has a specific onset time before a critical point is 

an opposed roll between the two Passions with the more suc- reached, after which debilitation occurs at a steady rate: 

cessful determining how the character acts. 
& Exposure occurs when the body is insufficiently protected 

As a general measure of depth of commitment, belief, and 
against a hostile environment. Assuming suitable clothing it 

loyalty to a cause. The higher the Passion’s value, the more 
usually starts to take effect after CON hours. The subsequent 

committed the character is. Characters with similar Passions 
Exposure Rate can range from daily to mere minutes depend- 

can compare and contrast their ratings to determine who 
ing on the weather conditions. See Temperature, page 84. 

exhibits the deeper commitment. 
Starvation takes place after an extended period without food. 

To resist some form of psychological manipulation or magical 
Critical levels of starvation begin after a number of days 

domination. In certain cases where a character is being forced 
equal to half CON. After this the Starvation Rate is daily. 

into performing an act contrary to his Passions, he may use 
Dehydration begins after CON x4 hours; although in arid or 

substitute his Passion for the usual Willpower in the opposed 
hot environments this might be CON x3 or even CON x2. 

roll. 
The ensuing Dehydration Rate depends on the ambient arid- 

During character creation characters establish up to three start- ity or humidity of the environment. See Precipitation page 

ing Passions; however new Passions can be developed at any point 84. 

during a MYTHRAS game session if the circumstances warrant it. 
Once any of the above conditions take hold characters start to 

One might instantly develop ‘Hate X’ where someone else does 
accrue Fatigue levels. An Endurance roll is required at onset, which 

something that would strongly invoke hatred to arise. A lord or chief 
is then repeated every time the Exposure, Starvation or Dehydration 

calling for an oath would immediately establish a Passion of ‘Loyalty 
Rate cycles. If the roll is failed then a level of Fatigued is accrued. 

to X’ as soon as that oath is taken or sworn — something explored 
Care should be taken to apply any skill penalties suffered for 

further in the Cults and Brotherhoods chapter. 
the current level of Fatigue. Eventually their increasing debilitation 

Passions developed during play in this way cost no Experience 
steadily wears down the character’s capabilities until Incapacitation 

Rolls, and are established there and then. Of course, characters can 
is reached. Thereafter, without help death will swiftly follow. 

also choose to establish a Passion during improvement, at the cost of 
an Experience roll to gain a Passion at its base value: see the chart 
on page 23 of the Culture and Community chapter. 

TrRaApPSs 
DEeEePpEeNnIinNgG AanNDd WAaNnIiNnGg Traps are ubiquitous devices used by every culture from the dig- 

Passions can increase during a game independently of Experi- ging of pitfalls to capture animals to death-traps guarding tombs for 

ence Rolls, based on the strength of whatever occurred to trigger all eternity. These devices are built for a range of purposes, each 

the increase. Also Passions can, and do, wane. A strongly held belief specifically tailored to raising an alarm, capturing interlopers, or 

can be shaken by many things leading to that Passion being either maiming and killing thieves outright. 

reduced or, in more extreme circumstances, reversed completely. 

82



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

Constructing traps requires that the builder knows either the 
Mechanisms or Engineering skill. Small traps such as bear traps or BUuIiLldDIinNgG TRrAaPpSs 
trapped locks require Mechanisms, whereas large scale construc- Use the Task rules (page 60 onwards) as the basis for building 

tions like spiked pits or rolling boulders need Engineering. traps, with the task round measured in hourly increments depending on 

Beyond hiring the constructing craftsman, traps often have very the sophistication of the device. If Enhancements are achieved, boost the 

expensive component or manual labour costs. As a general guideline trap's Difficulty by +5% for each Enhancement gained. 

alarms cost the skill of the creator in copper pieces, ensnaring traps 
the same in silver, and death-traps require payment in gold. 

All traps have a Difficulty rating which represents how difficult it devices is limited by the skill of its creator. Force is noted for those 

is to perceive, disarm or avoid. This value is treated as its skill when traps which fire projectiles which can be parried. 

resisted in an opposed roll. 
DeeAaTthH TRrAaPp DAaMmAaGgEe LimMIiTtSs 

Despite the many entertaining tales told by storytellers, traps — 
especially those intended to kill — rarely have a method of cleverly Maker’s Skill Damage SizelForce 

avoiding or reversing their effects once set in motion. Without magic 1-10% 1d2 Small 

or good fortune, those caught in a death-trap usually succumb to 11-20% 1d4 Small 
its highly efficient purpose. In short, they are not intended to be 

21-30% 1d6 Medium 
survivable. Unless the trap has some cunning design or is some sort 

31-40% 1d8 Medium 
of enduring magical enchantment, once it has been sprung it must 

41-50% 1d10 Large 
be manually reset. 

51-60% 2d6 Large 

61-70% 1d8+1d6 Huge 
TrRaApP TRrAaIiTtSs 

71-80% 2d8 Huge 
Traps are described using the following traits. 

81-90% 1d10+1d8 Enormous 

PUuRrPpOoSsEe 91-100% 2d10 Enormous 

The purpose of the trap. 

& Alarm — Trap sends a silent or audible signal that it has been SaAmMPpLlEe TRrAaPpSs 
triggered. These are example traps which Games Masters can use as tem- 

& Ensnaring — Trap is designed to capture anyone who triggers plates to create their own devious devices. 

or enters it. 
CRrUuSsHhIinNgG ROoOoFf 

& Maiming — Trap is intended to critically injure whoever trig- 
This trap often takes the form of a small room or short length of 

gers it. 
corridor. The trap has a lure of some sort, usually something of an 

& Death — Trap is intended to kill those who activate its lethal 
artistic or valuable nature which attracts the victim to enter. Most 

devices. 
crushing roof traps are dead ends with only one entry, perhaps with 
a false door on the other side; although rarely they are utilised as 

TRrIigGgGEerR additional security to prevent illicit access to a real doorway. 
The way the trap is set off. When triggered the entry portal slams closed with a metal port- 

cullis which locks into place. The roof then gradually lowers, its 
DiirfrficuLlty support pillars sinking into the floor as their supporting sand flows 

The challenge rating of the trap, which is equal to the value of away; or if the ceiling is suspended from some sort of ratchet device, 
the Mechanisms or Engineering skill which created it. For instance a the chains play out. 
scything blade trap built into the base of a treasure chest by a crafts- Due to the difficulty of carving entire roofs from a single piece of 
man with Mechanisms 70% grants the trap a Difficulty of 70%. rock, most ceilings are actually made of plastered wood, weighted 
The trap would thereafter use this value in opposed rolls to see if the on top with large rocks to provide extra mass. Unless the creator 
blade can be spotted, evaded or disarmed. deliberately incorporated a secret trapdoor in the ceiling to pro- 

vide an emergency escape route, victims typically suffer a long, slow 
REeSsIisStTaAnNCcEe 

demise as the weight of the roof crushes them to death. 
How the trap is resisted — typically using Brawn, Evade or par- 

Purpose: Death 
rying with a Combat Style which uses a shield. Resistance is rolled 

Trigger: Moving the lure object 
when the trap is triggered. 

Difficulty: 80% 

ErfFfecCTt Resistance: Evade to dive clear of the room before the entry slams shut. If 
several characters are trapped within the chamber; they may attempt to support 

What happens when the trap is sprung, and the victim(s) fail to 
the roof with Brawn whilst a companion attempts to open the door or find 

resist. Usually this results in the alerting of antagonists if an alarm or 
something with whick to wedge or support the roof In this circumstance add 

the capture of victims if designed to ensnare. Maiming and death- 
the SIS and STR of every resisting character to calculate their combined 

traps obviously injure the victim, although some death-traps utilise 
Damage Modifier;, and use this value with the highest Brawn skill of the 

other means than direct damage to inflict harm, such as drowning or 
party aganst the trap’s Damage Modifier of 2d8. 

poison. To restrict overly deadly traps, the damage inflicted by these 

83



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

Effect: Once the ceiling lowers far enough, victims become pinned to thef loor, ViissiiBbIiLlIitTyY TAaBbLlEe 
and receive 2d8 damage per round to a random Hit Location (armour does 
not protect), eventually crushing every bone in their body. Moonless 

Conditions  Daylight Twilight  Moonlight . 
Night 

PIitTfFaALlLl Clear 500 300 50 25 

A pitfall is an archetypal trap used by every culture. It can take 
Overcast 400 250 50 25 

the form a simple dug pit, covered by branches and leaves or reach 
Moderate 

the sophistication of stone walled sumps beneath hinged false floors 150 100 25 15 
Fog 

which are counterbalanced to swing back up into place after a victim 
Dense Fog 50 30 15 10 

drops in. 
Wind-driven 

Pitfalls need not be particularly deep. If designed for capture, a 35 25 10 5 
snow 

simple amphora or lobster pot shape will prevent escape by climb- 
Sand/dust 

ing, as will walls which are chiselled smooth or made from crumbling 20 15 10 5) 
storm 

material which gives way under a character’s weight. 
Pits which are instead intended to kill usually line the floor with 

dozens of stakes, closely packed so that a falling character will inev- 
larger objects increase the range by one multiple for every 10 points 

itably become impaled. Other options could include filling the bot- 
of SIZ over 20. So a SIZ 22 minotaur can be seen at double the 

tom with a weak acid, water deep enough to drown in, or starving 
distance, whereas a SIZ 37 cyclops could be spotted at triple the 

rats. 

Purpose: Ensnaring or Death distance. 

Trigger: Walking across thefalse surface covering the pit The same values can also be used for the primary senses of other 
creatures, such as an acute sense of smell or hearing. However in 

Difficulty: 60% 
these cases it an alternate modifier should be applied rather than 

Resistance: Eaither Evade to jump clear or a Hard Athletics roll to catch the 
SIZ. 

edge as they drop. 
Effect: The drop into the pit inflicts 2d6 damage to a random Hit Location, 
armour does not protect. Secondary effects are left to the Games Master’s 
imagination. WEeAaTtHhEeRr 

SpPeEaArR TRrAaPp Weather conditions can have a significant effect on the local envi- 
ronment. The main aspects of weather are precipitation, tempera- 

Spear traps are complex devices requiring hidden niches or a 
ture, and wind. These are detailed for the purposes of modelling 

separate chamber in which their mechanical launchers must be set. 
weather magic, reduction of character skills, and calculating the 

Their primary mode of operating is to drive a spear through a wall 
effects of weather on Survival. No tables are provided to generate 

or floor, powered by a counterweighted lever or compressed spring. 
random weather conditions, which are very much setting dependent. 

The manner of their placement can be quite inventive. Instead 
of the traditional spear hidden behind plaster or bas-reliefs, some 
versions have the spear in plain sight, held in the raised hand of an PRrEeCcIiPpIitTaAtTiIoOnN 
innocuous looking statue for instance, whose arm might pivot down Precipitation relates to the amount of moisture which falls out of 
to stab a victim from above. the sky. Depending on the temperature it can range between rain, 

Purpose: Maiming sleet and snow, with hail falling during storms. The base chance of 
Trigger: Stepping on a pressure plate or moving an object it raining is equal to the relative humidity. The amount of rain per 
Diffwculty: 75% hour and duration of the fall can be calculated by looking up the 
Resistance: Either Evade to dive aside or a Hard parry roll if wielding a relevant entry on the Precipitation table. 
shaeld. Normally precipitation has little effect on characters save to slow 
Effect: The spear inflicts 2d8 damage to a random Hit Location, but can be down travel if excessive rain causes flooding, or snow begins to drift, 
(partially) parried by a shield if its size us sufficient to counteract the spear’s obscuring or blocking paths. Rain also makes characters wet, which 
size of Huge. If the trap gains one or more levels of success over the victim it may increase their chance of suffering exposure if the ambient con- 
can apply Special Effects, such as Impale. ditions are windy or cold. 

TEemMPpEeRrAaTtuURrEe 
VIiSsIiBbIiLlIitTyY Temperate can vary dramatically due to climate, season, and 

The table opposite gives rough distances in metres for the visi- elevation, depending on the campaign world and where scenarios 

bility of man-sized objects, according to the ambient weather and are set. The following table provides a guideline for the effects of 

quality of light. Whilst intended to represent human sight other spe- extreme temperature on characters. 

cies may have more acute vision; the eyesight of an Iqari for instance Wearing suitable local clothing permits a character a grace 

(see page 252) might triple these distances. period of their CON in hours before exposure sets in. After this 

The SIZ of what someone is trying to observe also affects its point they need to seek shelter or start to suffer Fatigue loss (see 

visibility, as will other factors such as obscuring undergrowth, back- Survival page 49). Wet characters shift the Exposure Rate one step 

ground terrain, and possible camouflage. Assume targets with SIZ cooler. Light or moderate gale force winds also shift Exposure Rate 

10 or below halve the range at which they can be spotted, and that by one step cooler, whilst strong gales and storms shift it two steps. 

84



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEe SyYsStTeEmM 

WIiNnDd TAaBbLlEe TEemMPpEeRrAaTtUuRrEe TAaBbLlEe 

Movement 
Wind STR Sample Skill Grade Temp oC Climate EI:;Zi;{e Exposure Rate 

Rate 

Calm Day/Light Below -20 Glacial Yes Minutes 
0-15 Standard Normal 

Breeze -19 —-10 Treezing Yes 15 Minutes 

16-30 Moderate Breeze Standard Normal 9-0 Cold Yes Hourly 

31-45 Strong Breeze Standard Two Thirds 1-10 Chill Yes Daily 

46-60 Light Gale Hard Two Thirds 11-20 Cool No None 

61-75 Moderate Gale Hard Half 21-30 Warm No None 

76-90 Strong Gale Formidable Half 31-40 Hot Yes Hourly 

91+ Storm/Hurricane Formidable One Third 

PRrEeCcIiPpIitTaAtTiIoOnN TAaBbLlEe 

R[;il:_z::w Typical Cloud Cover Amount per Hour Duration Dehydration Rate 

0-12 None None None Hourly 

13-25 Scant cloud Very light (0-1mm) 1d10 minutes 2 Hours 

26-37 Scattered cloud Light (1-2.5mm) 1d6 x10 minutes 3 Hours 

38-50 Heavy cloud Moderate (2.5-10mm) 1d2 hours 4 Hours 

51-62 Slightly Overcast Heavy (11-25mm) 1d3 hours 4 Hours 

63-75 Moderately Overcast Very Heavy (26-50mm) 1d6 hours 3 Hours 

76-87 Completely Overcast Monsoon (51-80mm) 1d8 hours 2 Hours 

88-100 Storm Clouds Deluge (81+mm) 1d12 hours Hourly 

WIiNnDd 
Wind, especially very strong winds, can have an adverse effect on 

activity. A wind’s Strength (STR) is expressed in kilometres per hour 
of velocity. Its effect on physical skills — those involving STR or DEX 
—1is detailed in the Skill Grade column; effects on Movement Rate 
in the Movement Rate column (for example, a Light Gale of STR 
50 reduces human walking speed to two thirds or 4 metres; whilst a 
STR 95 Storm reduces it to 2 metres). 

80



Mythras:  Combat

— — — 
= YY S R (R < > 

Yy m KI n S LUK SO GO << A o IR UL AR | < A < 

Combat

— — 
BoH5 X = oM ¥ §row moKl T S I &K E B« r T X W 

ombat is an important feature of MYTHRAS. Violent con- 
frontation has ever been a way of settling problems, from COoMmPpOoNnEeNnTtSs 

C vengeance driven fights between nemeses, to the clash of 
armies in times of war. Combat need not be a savage battle to the oOFf COoMmBbAaTt 
death. Some combat encounters can be swashbuckling duels which MyYTHRAS uses a number of terms and concepts to explain the 

end without injury, or perhaps light-hearted bar room brawls. core elements of Combat. These are explained in the following sec- 

There are a number of central concepts which are an inherent tions, but in overview, these are: 

part of MYTHRAS combat: 
COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 

& Combat can be a very deadly business: Even the greatest The skill of wielding a group of weapons learned as part of a 
hero can be hacked down if seriously outnumbered, receive culture or profession. 
grievous wounds if abjuring armour, or suffer ‘the slings and 
arrows of outrageous fortune’ if luck turns her back. ComBbAaTt ROoUuNnDdSs 
Combat need not end in death: Although commonplace in Book keeping time segments of five seconds each. 

some genres, battles do not have to conclude with the demise 
of opponents. It is as easy to end a fight with the submission CoMmBbAaTt ACcTtIioONnSs 
or capture of a foe without necessarily killing them. Possible acts a character can perform during a round by the 

Combat is both abstract and tactical: Whilst the rules are not expenditure of an Action Point. 

specifically designed for tabletop miniatures, tactical manoeu- 
WEeAaPpOoNn S1izZeE AanNDd REeAaCchH 

vres and techniques are a vital part of how combat plays. A 
How difficult it is to parry a particular weapon, and the distance 

comprehensive range of options exist to take advantage of 
it can engage at. 

the situation if one participant gains the upper hand over 
another. 

EnNGgAaGgEemMEeNnTt 
Combat is exciting: Since combat is inherently dangerous, 

Combatants can hit or be hit by a direct opponent, depending 
a well orchestrated duel or melee will exhilarate players; the 

on circumstances. 
advantage swinging to and fro with innovative use of tactical 
choices and techniques. 

SPpEeCcIiaALl EFfFfEeCcTtSs 

MyTHRAS combat can be either gritty or cinematic: The rules Special combat manoeuvres which can be performed if one 

allow for the emulation of any genre, from the grim realism as combatant gains the upper hand. 

recounted from Viking Sagas to the highly visceral encounters in 
works of fantasy — such as written by Howard, Leiber or Gemmell 
— and mythological epics like the Iliad or Mahabharata. Whatever COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 
the setting, MYTHRAS is designed to handle all such confrontations. 

Fighting skills are purchased as styles. Each style is a ‘package’ of 
Whatever the intent of participants, their armaments or the situ- 

multiple weapons, related by culture, career or even schools of com- 
ation they find themselves in, all forms of physical combat are han- 

bat, which avoids the necessity of learning each individual weapon 
dled using these rules in this chapter. 

separately. Deciding how many weapons should be included into a 
single style is ultimately a choice determined by the Games Master. 

86

= 
A5 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm’’Ss SaAgGaA 
SaAmMPpLlEe COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 

As part of her cultural background, and civic duties, Anathaym learned 
The following are Combat Styles taken from elsewhere in the MrrH- 

the Meerish Slinger style, combining the art of slinging with the close combat 
RAS rules to help act as inspirationfor developingyour own Combat Styles. 

skill in shorisword, and peltast shield. During the hot summers of her adoles- 
cence she trained as part of a skirmishing unat learning how to sling stones at 

Meerish Infantry (Spear, Hoplite Shield, Favelin) 
largets, whilst sometimes wielding a shield in her off-hand. 

Meerish Slinger (Sting, Shortsword, Peltast Shueld) 
At the same time she was also taught how to use a shortsword, again both 

Centaur Warrior (Spear;, Shield, Short Bow) 
with, and without a shield, to prepare herf or close combat if ever her unit was 

Duwarven Legionary (Axe, Hammer, Shield, Crossbow) 
ever engaged in melee during a battle. She even knows how to fight with just a 

Elven Ranger (Sword, Speas; Shzeld, Bow) 
shaeld if she ever loses her shorisword in a_fight. This adaptability holds her 

Lizardman Savage (Axe, Shortspear; Target Shield) 
in good stead, since provided she is using at least one of her cultural weapons, 

Big Hutty Things - Ogres (Club, Hammer, Thrown Rock) 
she’ll never suffer a situational penally due to her comprehensive preparation. 

Striped Death - Tger (Teeth, and Claws) 
Crushing Doom - Giant Snake (Constrict, Bute, and Writhe) 

Games Masters should avoid, if possible, replicating the same 
n 4 weapon within additional Combat Styles. If unavoidable, common 

However, some guidance is provided here to help tailor Combat sense should be applied, such as limiting the character to use the 

Styles to match a particular campaign theme. relevant Combat Style skill if the weapon is used in combination 

The most important aspect of Combat Styles is that the char- with a second weapon available only to that specific style, or permit- 

acter learns how to use each weapon in the style, both singly and ting them to use the style with the highest value when wielding that 

in combination so that they might be interchanged as necessary. particular weapon singly. Duplication of weapons simply reflects 

Combat training does not focus merely on using a specific weapon superfluous, repetitive training. 

or weapons under best conditions, but also covers what to do when Choosing how many weapons should be part of a Combat Style 

placed at a severe disadvantage. Such cross-training is a primary depends ultimately on how important combat will be within a cam- 

part of preparing a combatant for the unpredictable events of the paign. Some suggestions are: 

battlefield, where weapon breakage or becoming disarmed is always 
& Combat Styles are very exclusive: Each style pertains to one 

a potential possibility. 
particular two-handed weapon or a specific paired weapon 

Almost all characters begin with the chance to learn a cultural 
combination. Best used for combat heavy campaigns such as 

combat style. This is supposed to reflect a basic education in those 
a game focused on gladiators, where each gladiatorial type 

weapons available for a member of that society and social 
has its own precise weapon combination (net and trident for 

rank, reflecting the training given for 
example). Exclusive styles necessitate a greater investment 

community (or perhaps personal) 
of skill points during character generation, and subsequent 

defence. Thus a barbarian karl 
investment of Experience Rolls to achieve 

may be expected to know diversification, which may slow down 
how to use a spear, hand the development rate of combative 
axe, and bow — the funda- 

characters. 
mental weapons and tools 

& Combat Styles are cult or 
of a commoner; whereas a 

school specific: Each style specia- 
thane from the same commu- 

lises in a few weapons of noted 
nity, growing up with access to 

significance to a particular 
better weapons, may be trained 

cult or school of combat. 
in swords, spears, and shields 

An evil brotherhood of 
instead. 

assassins may, for example, 
Some careers such as hunter 

train in unusual signature 
or warrior offer the option to learn 

weapons like blowpipes and 
further styles. These should reflect 

garrottes. Schools of combat 
more unusual weapons, or weap- might reflect the battlefield 
ons normally restricted from 

armaments of a mercenary 
someone not of their profession. 

company, or an ascetic martial 
So continuing the previous 

arts school. The suggested num- 
example, if the karl decided 

ber of weapons should range from 
to become a mercenary he 

two to three per style. 
might learn a new style, 

& Combat Styles are career 
diversifying  his compe- 

specific: Each style is limited to the core 
tence to include glaives, 

weapons used by a professional combat- 
great axes, and thrown 

ant of that career, for example a legionary 
axes. 

soldier should demon- 
strate competence in 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

shortsword, dagger, scutum, and javelin. The number and an inbuilt technical advantage the style offers for those particular sit- 
type of weapons should roughly match those of a similar his- uations. However, a trait is only intended to be used with the weap- 
torical context, between three or four per style. ons and situations of that particular style. 
Combat Styles are weapon class based: Each style incorpo- There are limitless diverse and potential benefits a Combat Style 
rates every weapon of a particular design or damage type. An can enjoy. The adjacent table merely suggests a few possibilities, and 
example may be ‘All Swords’, incorporating everything from is intended to offer flavour rather than overwhelming tactical advan- 
shortswords to greatswords; or ‘Bludgeoning Weapons’ cover- tage. Games Masters are encouraged to create further ones to match 
ing clubs, hammers, maces, and anything else which relies on their campaign setting. 
bashing to inflict damage. As can be surmised, these catego- Note that some of these benefits can potentially be applied, by 
ries can potentially include dozens of weapons. extension, to the Unarmed skill —either learned via culture or added 
Combat Styles are all-encompassing: These styles are inclu- later as part of a profession. 
sive of any, and all melee weapons, ranged weapons or both. 
This option is only recommended for campaigns where com- 

Usse oFf WEeAaPpOoNnSs NOoTt 
bat is infrequent, secondary to other forms of interaction. 

Covered by a Combat Style
It should be obvious that not all Combat Styles will be equal, or OVERED BY A OMBAT TYLE 

Occasionally characters may be forced to pick up an unfamil- 
necessarily need to balance with one another. Such considerations 

iar weapon, using it either independently or in conjunction with a 
are intended to be based on culture, social class and career — not be 

trained weapon. A character with a Sword and Shield style might, 
limited by game mechanics. 

for example, be forced to use a mace, or mace and shield together. 
By rights, using an untrained weapon forces the user to fight at 

WEeAaPpOoNn CHhOoIiCcEeSs his base Combat Style percentage. However, much depends on the 
When deciding on which particular weapons are included within weapon and how similar it is to something the user is experienced 

a Combat Style the following should be considered: with. Some guidelines on using unfamiliar weapons are as follows: 

& Two handed weapons generally have an advantage in both & If a weapon is substantially different from a trained weapon — 
terms of weapon reach (see page 61), and how much damage in weight, size, length and method of use — then offensive and 
they inflict, but leave the wielder vulnerable if the weapon defensive actions are made at the base Combat Style skill (ie, 
is lost. STR+DEX). 
Shields are the best defensive weapons, able to block fairly If a weapon is reasonably different from a trained weapon — say 
large weapons in addition to protecting against ranged attacks a greatsword when the combatant is trained with a broad- 
- which other weapons cannot normally parry. sword — then offensive and defensive actions are based on the 
Using two offensive weapons simultancously offers the existing Combat Style but are two grades more difficult. 
wielder a greater range of engagement distances and grants If a weapon is broadly similar to a trained weapon — say a 
some security if one weapon is broken, dropped or disarmed shortsword when the combatant is trained with a broadsword 
during combat. Secondary off-hand weapons must be at least — then offensive and defensive actions are one grade more 
one size category smaller than the main weapon, unless both difficult. 
are small. If a weapon is sumilar to a trained weapon — a scimitar say, as 
Ranged weapons grant the ability to strike from beyond the opposed to a broadsword — then the character uses his exist- 
immediate reach of an enemy, typically at the cost of a lower ing Combat Style with no penalty. 
rate of attack unless using anachronistic firearms or sorcerous If a combatant is using an unfamiliar weapon in conjunction 
devices. A Combat Style could potentially include unusual with a trained weapon, such as a shield, then the trained Com- 
weapons such as siege engines. bat Style is used, but is one grade harder. This simulates the 
Unarmed combat styles allow the user the opportunity to compensation in the overall style the combatant must make 
fight and defend themselves without the need of weapons. (adjusting balance, accounting for heft, and so on) necessary 
They are also useful in situations where an opponent has to use a combination of trained and untrained weapons. 
closed inside the reach of a wielded weapon. An unarmed The penalty imposed by use of an unfamiliar weapon cannot 
attack can be made with any part of the body, except for the reduce the user’s skill below the default level of STR+DEX. 
torso. Thus limbs, wings, tails and even the head can be used. 

COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEe BEeNnEeFfIiTtSs CoMmBbAaTt ROoUuNnDdSs 
Combat styles possess another function beyond simply learning a 

To emphasise its visceral nature, MYTHRAS combat is tracked on 
group of weapon skills. Since each style is taught by a particular cul- 

a blow by blow basis. In order to ease bookkeeping but still reflect 
ture or career, they are inherently optimised for the environment or 

the differences in speed or numbers of attacks, fights are broken 
military tactics that group normally fights with; for instance a horse 

down into Combat Rounds of five seconds each. During this period 
nomad learns to fight from the saddle, or an infantryman trains to 

combatants may make hand-to-hand attacks or defend against 
fight in close order formation. Therefore, as an additional bonus, 

them, manoeuvre into and out of combat, fire or throw a ranged 
every Combat Style may gain one or more traits which grant it an 

weapon, and so on. 
advantage under certain circumstances. This can be thought of as 

38



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEe TRrAaIiTtSs 

Trait Description 

Assassination Allows the user access to the normally restricted “Kill Silently” special effect. 

If the fighter’s Damage Modifier is two or more steps greater than his opponent’s, his weapon is considered one size larger for the purposes of 
Batter Aside 

bypassing parries. 

Beast-back Lancer Performing a mounted charge with this combat style does not incur the one step difficulty penalty to hit. 

Blind Fighting Allows user to ignore any penalties imposed due to poor lighting or temporary blinding. 

Cautious Fighter Can use the Change Range action to automatically withdraw from engagement with no need to roll 

Chariot Fighting Style allows those riding in a chariot to ignore the skill cap placed upon their combat rolls by the driver’s Drive skill. 

Daredevil May use Evade to dodge blows in hand to hand combat without ending up prone. 

Defensive Minded Increases the Size of your weapon when parrying by one step, provided no offensive action is taken that round. 

Do or Die Allows dual weapon combinations to use the Flurry special effect, provided that each subsequent attack utilises the alternating weapon. 

Excellent Footwork When fighting on slippery, wobbling surfaces the user can ignore the skill cap placed on combat rolls by the Acrobatics skill. 

Permits a group of three or more warriors to draw into close formation, placing more open or disordered opponents at a disadvantage (provided 
Formation Fighting* 

the “unit’ cannot be outflanked), and thus reducing each foe’s Action Points by one if they engage. 

Allows the user to utilise seemingly innocuous objects noted as part of the style as deadly weapons, with no chance of accidental breakage despite 
Hidden Weapons 

apparent delicacy (fans or musical instruments for example). 

Style encourages frequent yells and bellows in combat to intimidate foes, making any psychological resistance rolls inflicted on an opponent one 
Intimidating Scream 

grade harder. 

Knockout Blow When attacking with surprise treat any Stun Location as lasting minutes instead of turns. 

The styyle le g grants its user an advantag=e  when entanglgilnng g or immobilising g opOppp!o nents, making g a foe’s opPpPo sed rolls to evade or break free one 
Mancatcher 

difficulty grade harder. 

Mounted Combat Style allows rider to ignore the skill cap placed upon combat rolls by the Ride skill. 

Ranged Marksman When using a ranged weapon, shift a random Hit Location roll to an adjoining body location. 

Permits clubs and axes to roll the weapon’s damage twice and pick the best result, but only when using the Damage Weapon special effect against 
Shield Splitter 

shields. 

Allows a group of three or more shield users to overlap their protection, adding one to the number of locations which can be protected with 
Shield Wall* 

passive blocking and resisting Knockback, Leaping attacks, and Bash as if using the Brace action. 

The style permits its user to ignore the skill cap placed upon combat rolls by the Athletics skill when making assaults whilst scaling walls or crawling 
Siege Warfare 

through tunnels. 

Skirmishing The style permits launching ranged attacks whilst at a run (but not whilst sprinting). 

Style allows the user to engage in attacks and evades made whilst jumping or swinging into (or disengaging from) combat, ignoring any skill cap 
Swashbuckling 

placed on it by the Athletics skill. 

Throw Weapons Any nominal melee weapon in the style can also be thrown at no penalty to skill, but when used in this way a weapon’s damage roll is halved. 

Intended for styles which emphasise fighting in close coordination with an animal companion (such as trained birds of prey, pet wolves, and so on), 
Trained Beast 

the user may utilise any of his Action Points to defend against attacks launched at his beast. 

Unarmed Prowess Permits the user to treat his Unarmed blocks and parries as ‘Medium’ sized, enabling him to better defend himself from armed opponents. 

Water Combat The style allows its user to ignore the skill cap placed on combat rolls by the Swim skill. 

* Requires everyone else in the group to also have this benefit, otherwise the coordinated effortfails to lack of one or more participants being trained in the correct 
technique. 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Anathaym s trained in two separate Combat Styles, Meerish Slinger, and Meerish Infantry. Afiler considering the options available, the Games Master decides 

lo grant the Meerish Slinger style the Skirmisting trait, and the Meerish Infantry style the Formation Fighting trait. Thus her cultural and career styles now look 
like this: 

Meerish Shinger: (Skirmishing) sling, shortsword and peltast shield 
Meerish Infantry: (Formation Fighting) spear; hoplite shield and javelin 

Note that Anathaym s limated to ranged weapon skirmishing with her sling, andf ormationf ighting with spear and large shield. During the hundreds of hours she 
trained in combat, she only ever practiced slinging at a running gait, sincej avelin throwing was learned as part of being a close ordered unat. Simalarly she learned the 
lactics of fighting shoulder to shoulder only whilst using a spear and large hoplite shield, and wouldn’tf eel comfortable trying to fight as a_formation with a shorter 
weapon and smaller shield. 

39



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
On the plains outside the city Anathaym is practicing with shortsword and 

shield against her weapons tutor, Master Lamothis. Both she and her mentor 
have 3 Action Points each, but Anathaym rolls a better initiative. Goingf urst 
she decides to attack (Proactwe, 1 Action Point) which Zamothis effortlessly 
deflects (Reactive, 1 Action Point). Thus far they have each used one Action 
Point — Anathaym to attack and Zamotlus to parry. Then it s her mentor’s 
turn, and he returns with an attack (Proactve, 1 Action Point), forcing her to 
block (Reactive, 1 Action Point). Now they have used two Action Points each. 

Both have now taken their respective turns, but each stll has a Combat 
Action remaining; so the Games Master cycles back to the highest initiative 
again; allowing Anathaym lo attack a second time that round. Zamothis again 
parries the blow and the round ends, since neither has any Action Points 
remaining. Thus going furst allowed Anathaym to use her actions to attack 
twice and parry once. 

CAaLlCcUuLlAaTtIinNgG InNIitTIiaAtTIivVeE 
Initiative is calculated by each participant rolling 1d10 and add- 

ing their Initiative Bonus. Whoever gained the highest result acts 
first, followed by the second highest, and so on. When two or more 
participants tie scores they act concurrently. 

InNIitTiIaAtTIivVeE PEeNnAaLlTtYy 
Characters who wear armour are hindered by the encum- 

brance of their protection, slowed by its inherent mass and bulk. As 
described on page 58, a penalty is applied to Initiative equal to the 
total ENC for all the armour worn, divided by 5, and rounded up. 
Tor example, a full suit of Hoplite Plate armour, covering all seven 

Similarly to real life, most combat engagements — once joined hit locations, with an ENC value of 4 per location, imposes an Ini- 

— are concluded in a matter of seconds rather than minutes. In tiative penalty of (7x4)/5 = 6. 

game terms this means several Combat Rounds (usually three or 
less) unless participants withdraw to perhaps reset initiative, reassess CYyCcLlEeSs AanNDd TUuRrNnSs 
their tactical situation or simply to grab a momentary rest before Once initiative has been determined, the participants have the 
re-engaging. Only fights between well matched foes or sequences of potential to perform several Combat Actions during each Combat 
opponents tend to last longer. Round. The number of times they can act is equal to their Action 

Combat Rounds use several important terms: Points, but when they can act is limited to whether the action is pro- 

& Initiative: The order of who acts when during a Cycle of a active or reactive. 

Combat Round. Proactive actions can only be attempted on the character’s own 

& Cycle: The countdown through initiative values from the Turn; that is to say, when it is his initiative. Proactive actions are 

highest to the lowest, so that each participant has a chance to those in which the character is the instigator, such as making an 

take their Turn when their number is reached. There can be 
several cycles per Combat Round. ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 

& Turn: Upon each turn, participants perform a Combat As Master Zamothis continues hus lesson Anathaym notices three bel- 
Action, which comprises of a declaration, any necessary dice lLgerent centawrs, armed with bows, gallop out of a nearby gorge lowards 
rolls (including reactions), and the resolution of the action. them. She cries out a warning and interposes herself between her momentardly 

surprised mentor and the approaching raiders. 
Fach term is described in more detail, below. 

All three centaurs roll higher initiatives than Anathaym. Each one, on 
us turn, spends an Action Point to fire an arrow at the female warrwor. In 

InNIitTiIaAtTIivVeE response Anathaym defends herself against the fusillade with her shield, forc- 
Initiative determines participants’ order of actions during the ing her to block three times, once per arrow. This costs all three of her Action 

cycles of a Combat Round. It is rolled at the start of a fight. Unless Points, so when her turn arrives she s unable to do anything and indeed cannot 
something occurs to change the situation, such as certain Combat actf or the rest of the round. 
Actions or Special Effects, initiative remains in play until it is forced The Games Master cycles back to the highest initiative, butf ortunately for 
to be re-rolled. Anathaym the centawrs each spend their second (and last) Action Point nocking 

new arrows to their bows. Thus the end of the second cycle s reached, and 
since nobody has any Action Points remaining, a new round s begun. 

90



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

attack with a weapon. Only one proactive action may be attempted 
per cycle. If no proactive action is selected, the character is assumed KEeEePpIinNgG TRraACckK oOFf ACcTtIioOnN POoIiNnTtSs 
to have used Dither by default. 1t can be tricky to keep track of Action Points during a round, espe- 

Reactive actions are those taken by a character to counter or ctally if characters make a habit of using Combat Actions such as Delay 

resist an act made against them. Only one reaction attempt is per- or casting spells which require more than one turn to complete. As an aide 

mitted for each threat, an example would be trying to parry an lo simplify book keeping, the use of tokens (coins or poker chips are ideal) 

attack. However, any number of reactions may be made per cycle, 15 recommended. 

provided that the character has Action Points to spend. Guve each player a number of tokens equal to their Action Points, 

The end of the cycle is reached once every participant has taken then each time they act or react, remove one of the tokens — tossing them 

their turn. If anyone still has Action Points remaining then a new into a used pile in the centre of the table. In the case of the Delay action, 

cycle is begun for those characters with Action Points available. This the token can be moved half way, indicating a held action which can be 

continues until all available Action Points have been expended, at triggered at a later point. For spell casting a separate pile could be formed 

which point the round is over, and a new one begins. which keeps track of how many turns have been invested thus far: 
When each round concludes the players can reclaim a requasite number 

of tokensfrom the discard pile. Of course other methods can be used, such 
COoMmBbAaTt ACcTtIioONnSs as using due as trackers or even tallying Action Points on scrap paper. 

Combat Actions are those acts which can be performed during N f 
battle. Drawing a weapon, casting a spell, or diving clear from an 
attack are all examples of Combat Actions. Most are concerned 

Change Range
with elements of combat itself, but some relate to activities outside HANGE ANGE 

the to and fro of spells and weapons. The character can attempt to close on, or retreat from, an oppo- 
nent; changing the range at which he is fighting to take best advan- 

As previously mentioned, how often a character can act per 
round is limited by their available Action Points. These are spent tage of his weapon’s reach or disengage from engagement entirely. 

over the course of each Combat Round to perform various Combat See Weapon Reach - Closing and Opening Range on page 106. 

Actions. Once a combatant’s Action Points are expended, they may 
DeeLlay 

no longer act for the remainder of that round, and must wait until 
The character conserves his action so that he can instead perform 

their points reset at the beginning of the next. 
a Reactive Action at a later time, such as an Interrupt or Parry. The 

Unless otherwise specified any Combat Action (save for ‘free’ 
Action Point cost of delaying is covered by whatever act is finally 

actions) costs one Action Point. Thus combatants need to care- 
performed. If the delayed action is not taken before the character’s 

fully consider how and when they use their points. They may act as 
next turn (on the following cycle), then the character is considered to 

aggressively or defensively as they wish, dynamically reacting to the 
have Dithered, and the Action Point is lost. 

evolving circumstance of the combat. 

DiiTthHEeRr 
PRrOoAaCcTtIiVvEe ACcTtIioONnSs 

A character can decide to simply waste his turn doing nothing 
The following are activities a character can attempt on his Turn 

useful. 
by spending an Action Point. Note that some actions such as spell 
casting or reloading may take several turns to complete; each turn 

Howlpd Maacgiic 
costing its own Action Point. Once casting is complete, the character may hold a spell, miracle 

or spirit in temporary check, awaiting the best moment to release it. 
ATtTtaAcCkK 

The magic may be held back for as long as the character continues 
The character can attempt to strike with a hand-to-hand weapon 

to take this action on his subsequent turns, but allows free use of the 
or use a ranged weapon. 

Counter Spell reaction if pertinent to his spell. 

BRrrRaAcCeE 
Moouunnt 

The character braces himself by taking a firm stance, and lean- 
The character can mount or dismount a riding beast. Particu- 

ing into the direction of a forthcoming attack. For the purposes 
larly large mounts may require several turns to complete. 

of resisting Knockback or Leaping Attacks the character’s SIZ is 
treated as 50% bigger. Against the Bash special effect SIZ is dou- 

Moovvee 
bled. The benefits of bracing are lost once the character moves away Provided he is not engaged with an opponent, the character can 
from the place they planted themselves. move any distance the Games Master deems suitable for the situa- 

ton. The Move Combat action is not required for every instance of 
CAasTt MAaGgIiCc 

movement during combat. 
The character can attempt to cast a spell, call for a miracle, 

One does not need to spend an Action Point on Move to engage 
invoke a talent or summon a spirit. Complex magics may require 

an opponent. For instance, a character crossing an open field to 
several turns in order to complete the casting. Once concluded, the 

engage a group of archers would spend 1 Action Point to cover the 
magic can be released at any moment up until the caster’s next turn; 

distance. He would not, though, need to spend a further Action 
at which point it can be held for later effect; but this requires the 

Point to initiate combat with one of the archers when he reaches 
Hold Magic action (see below) to maintain it in preparation for later 

their vantage point. He may use his next turn solely for his attack 
release. 

roll. 

91



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA StTrRuUGgGgLlEe 
Backtracking the centawrs’ trail, Anathaym and Zamothus discover the If the character is the victim of a certain types of attack or Spe- 

raider’s encampment in a small cave-filled canyon far to the west of Meeros. cial Effect, he may attempt to extract himself from the situation. For 

Using the cover of darkness they creep close enough to see a sorcerer by the example breaking free from a Grapple or Pin Weapon. 

name of Kratos, whom the herd is serving, about to perform a human sac- 
rifce of a youth tied spread-eagled between frighteningly carved totem poles. REeAaCcTtIiVvEe ACcTtIioONnSs 
Lamothis orders Anathaym to deal with the black wizard, then yells loudly This list specifies reactions which can be used at any time during 

and, bedecked in his bronze hoplite armows; heroically leaps down into the the Combat Round as a response to an imminent threat. As in the 

madst of the centaur warriwors to cause a distraction. previous list, a reaction costs an Action Point to perform. 

Anathaym runs to engage the sorcerer and Initiative 1s rolled, resulting in 
COoUuNnTtEeRr SPpEeLlLl 

Kratos gaining the higher Initiative. Spotting her approach the sorcerer imme- 
The character can attempt to dismiss or counter an incoming 

diately begins invoking a diabolical spell, one which the Games Master deter- 
spell, miracle or spirit. This assumes the countering magic has a 

manes will take two turns to cast. He marks off the fust of Kratos® Action 
casting time of one Turn, otherwise it must be prepared in advance, 

Points for the round. Guessing at her immanent doom, Anathaym on her turn 
and temporarily withheld using the Hold Magic action. Successfully 

tries to stab the sorcerer; forcing Kralos (who has no weapons) to Evade in a 
intercepting magic in this manner is assumed to negate the entire 

desperate attempt to avoud the blow. Rolls are made, and the sorcerer success- 
spell or miracle, even those with multiple targets or areas of effect. 

JSully throws kamself backwards into the shadows, but is now prone upon the 
rocky ground. T his concludes the cycle, with Anathaym having used one Action 

EVvaAdDEe 
Point, and Kratos two. 

The character can attempt to dive or roll clear of threats such as 
The next cycle begins with the sorcerer in apparent difficully. He has one 

incoming missiles or a charging attack. Using Evade leaves the char- 
Action Point remaining, and has the choice of either kicking at the warrior 

acter prone, unless mitigated by some special consequence. Thus 
in the hope of perhaps tripping her (leaving him at the mercy of Anathaym’s 

the character’s next turn is usually spent taking the Regain Footing 
sword_for the rest of the round) or continuing his half cast spell. Facing little 

action to stand again. See Evading on page 103. 
chance of mercy Kralos uses his turn to complete his spell and rolls against his 
Invocation skill. Despite an imposed difficultly grade of Formidablefor lying InNtTeErRrRuUPpTt 
on las back, he succeeds, and disappears in a puff of greasy, black smoke. (Delaying characters only) Halts an opponent’s turn after his decla- 
Anathaym 15 left on her turn with nobody to attack, so revises her intentions ration in order to take your own delayed turn. Assuming no change 
and starts cutting the youtl’s bonds... in the tactical situation, the opponent continues his turn after yours 

is completed. If unable to still achieve his original declaration, the 
opponent’s Action Point is wasted. An interrupt can also be used 

To summarise, use the Move Combat Action for: 
against anyone passing close by the delaying character, within 

& Moving up towards a combat weapon reach. 

& Perform a dramatic action within combat (swing from a 
handy chandelier, for example) DEeLlAaYy aAnNDd InNtTeErRrRuUPpTt 

Delay s intended to be a way of allowing a character to conserve 
Move s not necessary to engage an opponent. 

all of their Action Points in a Round jfor reactive actions; for example 
parrying 

OUuTtMmAaNnOoEeUuVvRrEe 
Interrupt, on the other hand, is intended to permit pre-emptive actions 

The character can engage multiple opponents in a group 
which could, but do not necessarily, involve combat, such as slamming a 

opposed roll of Evade skills. Those who fail to beat his roll cannot 
door shut, knocking a siege engine off target, waiting for the clear shot, 

attack him that Combat Round. See the section on Outmanoeu- 
and so on. 1t is also worded to allow characters to intercept those that try 

vring on page 104. 
to dodge or pass close by them. 

REeeaAdDyY Neither Delay nor Interrupt are intended to be used as a way of 
 WEeAaPpOoNn 

The character may draw, sheath, withdraw or reload a weapon. gaining an Action Point advantage over a closing opponent: it is not in the 

Retrieving a nearby dropped weapon requires two turns: one to spurit of the rules to permat the withholding of actions until engagement 

move and reach down for the weapon, and a second to return to has been initiated. 

a readied stance. Some missile weapons require several turns to - 4 
reload. 

REeGgAaIinN FoOOoTtIinNgG 
If unengaged with an opponent, the character can regain his PAaRrRrYy 

The character can attempt to defend against an incoming attack 
footing from being tripped or knocked down. If engaged, the char- 
acter must win an opposed test of Brawn or Athletics with the oppo- using a combination of parrying, blocking, leaning, ducking or 

nent before standing. side-stepping footwork to minimise the blow. 

FRrEeEe ACcTtIioONnSs 
Free actions can be performed at any time during the Combat 

Round, and cost no Action Points to perform. 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

ASsSsEeSsSs SIitTuUaAtTiIoOnN WAaRrDd LoOCcAaTtIioOnN 
If unengaged, a character can make a Perception roll at no The character guards a particular Hit Location from being hit by 

Action Point cost. Success in the roll alerts them to any relevant dedicating one of his weapons to statically cover the area. Any blow 
changes in the tactical situation (such a spotting a foe beginning a which lands on that location has its damage automatically down- 
charge). graded as per normal for a parrying weapon of its Size. The ward 

continues until the dedicated weapon is used to attack or actively 
Drrooprp WEeAaPpOoNn parry. Establishing a ward or changing the Hit Location covered 

Dropping a weapon is a I'ree Action. must be performed prior to an opponent rolling to attack the charac- 
ter. Due to their design, shields can cover multiple areas. For further 

SIigGnNaALl 
explanation see Passive Blocking, page 105. 

If unengaged, gesturing or signalling to one or more participants 
(as long as they can perceive the sign) is a Free Action. 

SpPeEaAkK WEeAaPpOoNn SIizZeE 
A character can speak at any time during combat, but what is 

said should be limited to short phrases which can be uttered in five aAnNDd REeAaCchH 
seconds or less; for example “Time to die!”, ‘Look out behind you!” Every weapon in MYTHRAS possesses a number of different attri- 
or ‘Damn you to hell”” butes from the damage it deals to how many hands are required to 

wield it. Two of these ratings, Size and Reach are important due 
Usse Luck PoIinNTt to their mechanical effect. Size is used to determine the weapon’s 

Using a Luck Point — to re-roll a particular result for example —is ability to impose and parry damage (see Damage Reduction in this 
a Free Action. 

93



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

chapter), whilst Reach can affect whether an opponent lies within 
range of being struck (see Weapon Reach - Closing and Opening How CoMmBbAaTt WOoRrKkSs 
Range on page 1006). Fighting in MYTHRAS is resolved in a blow by blow progression, 

Size categories are Small, Medium, Large, Huge, and Enormous. each attack or parry representing a single swing, cast or shot of a 
Reach categories are Touch, Short, Medium, Long, and Very Long. Some weapon. Any offensive action is permitted the chance to be resisted 
monsters and weapons further extend these categories beyond the by a reaction. Thus even if a character manages to strike an oppo- 
scope of human characters, as illustrated in the Creatures chapter. nent, the foe is permitted its own roll to see if it can parry the blow 

Both of these ratings are largely abstract in nature, simplified to before it lands. The same philosophy is used whether the attacks are 
help speed play. Size is a combination of a weapon’s mass, leverage missile weapons against targets diving for cover, or trying to break 
and stability. Reach is more a measure of its length and ability to free from the iron grasp of a giant octopus. 
hold a foe at bay due to how far it extends beyond the hilt or grip. 

The Equipment chapter provides default Size and Reach values 
ATtTtAaCcKkSs AanNDd PAaRrRrIiEeSs 

for common weapons, but the following guidelines are provided for 
Close combat is handled in the following step by step manner: 

those Games Masters wishing to design their own armaments. 
The unarmed attacks of creatures are assigned similar categories 

1. On his turn the attacker spends an Action Point, rolls 
according to their physical characteristics. See page 222. 

against his Combat Style and notes the result. 
WEeAaPpOoNn Sii1zzeE CAaTtEeGgOoRrIiEeSs 2. If desired, the defender spends an Action Point, rolls against 

Size Description his Combat Style and notes the result. 

Human unarmed combat, and light single handed weapons 3. The success level of the results are compared as per a Dif- 
Small . . 

less than a kilo in weight, such as a dagger ferential Roll. 

. Single handed weapons over a kilo in weight, a mace for 4. Any difference grants the combatant with the superior roll 
Medium i 

instance one or more Special Effects (see below). 
5. If the attacker achieved a success or critical, he may roll 

Long hafted thrusting weapons, two handed spears being a 
Large R . 

case in point weapon damage and apply their Damage Modifier (if any). 
If applicable, a Hit Location is determined for the blow. 

i Two handed slashing, chopping or bashing weapons, like 
uge 
g greatswords 6. If the defender achieved a success or critical, reduce any 

damage inflicted according to the comparative sizes of the 
Weapons used by very large creatures, for example a tree 

Enormous weapons involved. 
trunk used by a giant 

It should be noted that any Special Effects generated by the 
WEeAaPpOoNn REeAaCchH  CAaTtEeGgOoRrIiEeSs exchange are independent of whether or not damage is inflicted. It 
Reach Description is quite possible for a defender to gain the higher success level, yet 
Touch Human reach in unarmed combat, knuckledusters, spiked still suffer injury. 

kneepads, and so on 

Short Weapons less than half a metre long; such as a dagger or 
DAaMmAaGgEe REeDdUuCcTtIioOnN 

short sword If a defender succeeds in parrying, then he can reduce an attack- 
Medium Single handed swung weapons longer than half a metre, er’s damage, if any, according to the comparative Size of the weap- 

like a ball and chain ons used. 
Long Single handed thrusting weapons, or two handed swung 

& Parrying an attack with a weapon or shield of equal or greater 
weapons, a great axe for instance 

Size deflects all damage 
Very Long Two handed or mounted thrusting weapons, polearms or & Parrying with a weapon or shield of one Size less only deflects 

lances for example half damage 
& Parrying with a weapon or shield #wo or more Sizes less fails to 

deflect any damage 

For example, parrying a great axe (Huge) with a hoplite shield (also Huge) 

KEeEePpIinNgG TrRaACckK oOFf ATtTtaAcCkK RooLlLls would block all damage; parrying it with a pike (Large) would halve the damage, 

As will be_further explained in the rules, some Special Effects and and parrying it with a shortsword (Medium) would stop no damage at all. 

certain types of injury require an opposed roll of some sort against the 
attacker’s original attack roll. The same thing applies to offensive magic. PAaRrRrYyIinNgG aA MIiSsSsEedD ATtTtaAcCkK 
For this reason it s a useful habitfor players to leave the percentage dice 

If the attacker misses his initial attack roll, the defender has 
lying untouched on the table until the attack and consequences have been 

the option of whether or not to spend an Action Point to parry. 
Sully resolved. In this way the dice provide a record of what number was 

Although it may seem disingenuous to parry an attack which will 
actually rolled, thus helping to avoid lapses of memory or unnecessary 

miss anyway, a skilled defender can use this to his advantage to gain 
dispute. 

one or more Special Effects, potentially weakening or incapacitating 

N 4 a foe, and preserving their next turn for some other action. 

94



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

DAaMmAaGgEe REeDdUuCcTtIioOnN TAaBbLlEe 

Attacking Weapon 

Small Medium Large Huge Enormous 

Small All Half None None None 

Medium All All Half None None 

Defending Weapon Large All All All Half None 

Huge All All All All Half 

Enormous All All All All All 

opponent fumbles, then he misses the opportunity to take advantage 
UNnAaBbLlEe oORr UNnWwILilLlIinNgG tToO PAaRrRrYy 

of his foe’s clumsiness. 
In a situation where a defender is unable to parry due to having 

In the rare circumstance that both opponents fumble, Games 
no Action Points remaining, or, confident in his ability to weather 

Masters are encouraged to describe some hilarious or amazingly 
the blow, elects not to parry, he is treated as having automatically 

improbable event occurring which temporarily takes both out of the 
rolled a failure. This has the consequence of granting a successful 

fight. 
attacker one or more Special Effects. 

FaAIilLeEdD ROoLlLls aAnNDd FuUMmBbLlEeSs 
If both combatants fail their rolls, or the defender decides not to SPpEeCcIiaALl EFfFfEeCcTtSs 

take advantage of a missed attack, then the attack-parry sequence Fighting is far more than simply injuring or killing an opponent. 

ends, and combat continues on to the participant with the next high- Combative arts teach many methods of defeating a foe, perhaps 

est Initiative. rendering them helpless or forcing them into situations where they 

Fumbling a Combat Style roll has no additional effect other than must capitulate, without necessarily needing to actually cause them 

the chance it provides his opponent to inflict multiple (and more harm. Special Effects represent these techniques, and control how 

dire) Special Effects against him. If a combatant fails when his they occur in play. 
Whenever opponents engage in a Differential Roll of their 

respective fighting skills (Combat Styles or Evade for example), 
any resulting difference in success levels indicates an opportunity 

REeTtRrOoAaCcTtIiVvEe PAaRrRrYyIinNgG WIiTthH for Special Effects to occur. This reflects one combatant manoeu- 

Aa SKkIiLllL oOVvEerR 100% vring his opponent into a disadvantageous situation which can be 
exploited using a cunning trick or tactic. 

Allowing a character to parry only those attacks which will bt is an 
The number of Special Effects received depends on the differ- 

essential part of maintaining the unpredictable flow of combat. However 
ence between the levels of success, as illustrated on the Differential 

it does start to cause problems when the defender has a combat skill exceed- 
Roll Results Table (see page 51). 

ing 100 %, since what was originally a successful roll by the attacker may 
If any Special Effects are won during an exchange, they must 

become downgraded to a muss if the penalty provided by the defender’s 
be selected before Damage and Hit Location, if any, are rolled. In 

superior skill us retroactively applied. 
cases where the recipient is badly wounded in addition to receiving 

To avoid messy calculations or causalily issues, the best way to handle 
a Special Effect, Endurance rolls are resolved after the application 

this situation s to only permut the defender to impose his over 100% skill 
of the effect. 

penally if he pro-actively defends, declaring his parry before the attacker 
Special Effects cover a diverse range of situations and techniques. 

r0lls. Thas has the added benefit of preventing superhumanly skilled oppo- 
Some are designed specifically for attacks, whilst others are intended 

nents_from being near-immune lo atlacks without the need to expend Action 
for defence, and a few are adaptable for either circumstance. Certain 

Points to defend themselves. 
Special Effects can also be limited to particular weapon types or 
specific dice rolls, requiring a Critical or Fumble result on their skill 

For example; despite hus best efforts to outmanoewvre them, Master 
check for instance. 

Lamothis s surrounded by centaur opponents. The grizzled warrior is 
When two or more Special Effects are gained, the combatant 

worthy of his title, possessing (amongst others) a Combat Style (Meerish 
may freely mix and match which ones are selected, providing he 

Infantry) skill of 120%. However he is surrounded andf aces the tough 
meets the prerequisite conditions for each one. Some effects can be 

chotce of whether or not to use his remaining two Action Points to defend 
stacked. For example, an attacker who rolls a critical success and 

fumself- Since hus skill s so high that it would provide a penally to his 
wins two Special Effects could choose Maximise Damage twice, 

attackers, the Games Master asks lus player of he wishes to declare his 
rather than choosing two separate offensive manoeuvres. 

parry i advance (thus reducing the centawrs impending attack skill by 
20%) or withhold parrying until i is seen whether the centawrs hut or 
miss at their normal skill. 
N - 

95



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

Tatigue, until they collapse and possibly die. Bleeding wounds can 
be staunched by passing a First Aid skill roll, but the recipient can no 
longer perform any strenuous or violent action without re-opening 
the wound. See Blood Loss page 71. 

BluinDd OPpPpOoNnEeNnTt 
On a critical the defender briefly blinds his opponent by throw- 

ing sand, reflecting sunlight off his shield, or some other tactic which 
briefly interferes with the attacker’s vision. The attacker must make 
an opposed roll of his Evade skill (or Weapon style if using a shield) 
against the defender’s original parry roll. If the attacker fails he suf- 
fers the Blindness situational modifier for the next 1d3 turns. 

ByPpAasss ARrmMOoUuRr 
On a critical the attacker finds a gap in the defender’s natural or 

worn armour. If the defender is wearing armour above natural pro- 
tection, then the attacker must decide which of the two is bypassed. 
This effect can be stacked to bypass both. For the purposes of this 
effect, physical protection gained from magic is considered as being 
worn armour. 

CHhOoOoSsEe LoOCcAaTtIioOnN 
When using hand-to-hand melee weapons the attacker may freely 

select the location where the blow lands, as long as that location is 
normally within reach. If using ranged weapons Choose Location is 
a Critical Success only, unless the target is within close range, and is 
either stationary or unaware of the attacker. 

THhEe HEeAaDd?? AGgAaIiNn? 
SPpEeCcIiaALl EFfFfeEcCTt DEeSsCcRrIiPpTtIioOnNSs Some Games Masters may find the Choose Location special effect a 

rather sour annoyance, especially if their players continue to take downf oe 

ACcCcIiDdEeNnTtAaLl InNjJuUrRyY afler foe with exactly the same blow. What might surprise many people 

The defender deflects or twists an opponent’s attack in such a lo know 1s that this behaviour s exactly matched by real life combat. Not 
way that he fumbles, injuring himself. The attacker must roll dam- only is the head s the closest part of the body to strike, but shields tend to 
age against himself in a random hit location using the weapon used be held beneath the level of the eyes, exposing the head and part of theface 

to strike. If unarmed he tears or breaks something internal, the 50 thatyou can see your opponent. 

damage roll ignoring any armour. T here are several techniques which can help prevent foes being chopped 
down with the same blow. Furst, and most obvious, s to wear a hel- 

ARrIiSsEe met, which after shields was the most prevalent type of protection used 
Allows the defender to use a momentary opening to roll back up throughout hastory. Secondly s to use the Ward Location action. This is a 

to their feet. Dperfectly natural thing to do, since once an opponent has suffered a wound 
he will tend to try to keep that weakened area covered so that it cannot be 

BAashH struck again. 
The attacker deliberately bashes the opponent oft balance. How Last but by no means least the Games Master should hamself use 

far the defender totters back or sideward depends on the weapon a range of dwerse and interesting Special Ejffects, showing that Choose 
being used. Shields knock an opponent back one metre per for Locatwon can be eclipsed by manoeuvres such as Bleed, Stun Location or 
every two points of damage rolled (prior to any subtractions due to even Bash in the right circumstances! 
armour, parries, and so forth), whereas bludgeoning weapons knock 
back one metre per for every three points. Bashing works only on . 4 
creatures up to twice the attacker’s SIZ. If the recipient is forced 
backwards into an obstacle, then they must make a Hard Athletics 

CIirRcCuUmMVvEenNTt COoVvEeRr 
or Acrobatics skill roll to avoid falling or tripping over. 

Assuming that the shooter is using some high-tech weaponry, 
they can fire around the target’s cover. In most cases this will require 

BLlEeeEdD 
The attacker can attempt to cut open a major blood vessel. If the something along the lines of self guided ammunition. If used as a 

blow overcomes Armour Points and injures the target, the defender trick shot, for example bouncing a laser blast off a mirror or rico- 
cheting a bullet off a wall, then the special effect should be treated as 

must make an opposed roll of Endurance against the original attack 
a Ciritical Success only with a commensurate reduction in damage. 

roll. If the defender fails, then they begin to bleed profusely. At 
the start of each Combat Round the recipient loses one level of 

96



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

CIirRcCuUmMVvEenNTt PAaRrRrYy EnNHhAaNnCcEe PAaRrRrYy 
On a critical the attacker may completely bypass an otherwise On a critical the defender manages to deflect the entire force of 

successful parry. an attack, no matter the Size of his weapon. 

CLlosse RAaNnGgEe ENnTtaANnGgLlEe 
Permits the character to automatically change the engagement Allows a character wielding an entangling weapon, such as a 

range between himself and his opponent, so that they end up at the whip or net, to immobilise the location struck. An entangled arm 
Range favoured by the shorter weapon (see Weapon Reach - Closing cannot use whatever it is holding; a snared leg prevents the target 
and Opening Range page 106). from moving; whilst an enmeshed head, chest or abdomen makes 

all skill rolls one grade harder. On his following turn the wielder 
COoMmPpEeLl SuURrRrEenNDdEeRr may spend an Action Point to make an automatic Irip Opponent 

Allows the character a chance to force the surrender of a help- attempt. An entangled victim can attempt to free himself on his turn 
less or disadvantaged opponent; for example someone who has been by either attempting an opposed roll using Brawn to yank free, or 
disarmed, is lying prone unable to regain his footing, has suffered a win a Special Effect and select Damage Weapon, Disarm Opponent 
serious (or worse) wound, and so on. Damage is not inflicted on the or Slip Free. 
target, they are only threatened. Assuming the target is sapient and 
able to understand the demand, the target must make an opposed FlLuURrRrYy 
roll of Willpower against the original attack or parry roll. If the tar- An unarmed creature or attacker can make an immediate fol- 
get fails, they capitulate. Games Masters may wish to reserve Com- low-up attack using a different limb or body part, without needing 
pel Surrender for use against non-player characters only. to wait for its next turn. A human attacker might follow up a punch 

to the abdomen with a knee to the face for example. The additional 
DAaMmAaGgEe WEeAaPpOoNn attack still costs an Action Point, but potentially allows several attacks 

Permits the character to damage his opponent’s weapon as part in sequence before the defender can respond offensively. 
of an attack or parry. If attacking, the character aims specifically at 
the defender’s parrying weapon and applies his damage roll to it, FoORrCcEe FaAIilLuUrREe 
rather than the wielder. The targeted weapon uses its own Armour Used when an opponent fumbles, the character can com- 
Points for resisting the damage. If reduced to zero Hit Points the bine Force Failure with any other Special Effect which requires 
weapon breaks. an opposed roll to work. Force Failure causes the opponent to fail 

his resistance roll by default — thereby automatically be disarmed, 
DiisarrRmM OPpPpOoNnEeNnTt tripped, etc. 

The character knocks, yanks or twists the opponent’s weapon 
out of his hand. The opponent must make an opposed roll of his Grriip 
Combat Style against the character’s original roll. If the recipient of Provided the opponent is within the attacker’s Unarmed Com- 
the disarm loses, his weapon is flung a distance equal to the roll of bat reach, he may use an empty hand (or similar limb capable of 
the disarmer’s Damage Modifier in metres. If there is no Damage gripping such as claws, tails or tentacles) to hold onto the opponent, 
Modifier then the weapon drops at the disarmed person’s feet. The preventing them from being able to change weapon range or disen- 
comparative size of the weapons affects the roll. Each step that the gage from combat. The opponent may attempt to break free on his 
disarming character’s weapon is larger increases the difficulty of the turn, requiring an opposed roll of either Brawn or Unarmed against 
opponent’s roll by one grade. Conversely each step the disarming whichever of the two skills the gripper prefers. If the gripped vic- 
character’s weapon is smaller, makes the difficulty one grade eas- tim wins, they manage to break free. Note that some attackers using 
ier. Disarming works only on creatures of up to twice the attacker’s Brawn may be so strong that no amount of brute force or cunning 
STR. technique can overcome their grip (see Brawn page 39). 

Drorp Foe ImMPpAaLlEe 
Assuming the target suffers at least a minor wound from the shot, The attacker can attempt to drive an impaling weapon deep into 

they are forced to make an Opposed Test of their Endurance against the defender. Roll weapon damage twice, with the attacker choosing 
the attacker’s hit roll. Failure indicates that the target succumbs to which of the two results to use for the attack. If armour is penetrated 
shock and pain, becoming incapacitated and unable to continue and causes a wound, then the attacker has the option of leaving the 
fighting. Recovery from incapacitation can be performed with a weapon in the wound, or yanking it free on their next turn. Leaving 
successful First Aid check or using some form of technological or the weapon in the wound inflicts a difficulty grade on the victim’s 
narcotic booster if such exists in the campaign. Otherwise the tem- future skill attempts. The severity of the penalty depends on the size 
porary incapacitation lasts for a period equal to one hour divided by of both the creature and the weapon impaling it, as listed on the 
the Healing Rate of the target. Impale Effects Table above. For simplicity’s sake, further impale- 

ments with the same sized weapon inflict no additional penalties. 
Duck BAack To withdraw an impaled weapon during melee requires use of the 

This special effect allows the shooter to immediately duck back Ready Weapon combat action. The wielder must pass an unopposed 
into cover, without needing to wait for their next Turn to use the Brawn roll (or win an opposed Brawn roll if the opponent resists). 
Take Cover action. The character must be already standing or Success pulls the weapon free, causing further injury to the same 
crouching adjacent to some form of cover to use Duck Back. location equal to half the normal damage roll for that weapon, 

97



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

ImMPpAaLlEe EFfFfEeCcTtSs TAaBbLlEe 
Creature SIZ Small Weapons Medium Weapons Large Weapons Huge Weapons Enormous Weapons 

1-10 Tormidable Herculean Incapacitated Incapacitated Incapacitated 

11-20 Hard Tormidable Herculean Incapacitated Incapacitated 

21-30 No Effect Hard Tormidable Herculean Incapacitated 

31-40 No Effect No Effect Hard Formidable Herculean 

41-50 No Effect No Effect No Effect Hard Tormidable 

Each +10 Tollow table progression 

but without any damage modifier. Failure implies that the weapon through the first victim to strike a second behind them, assuming 
remained stuck in the wound with no further effect, although the that it overcomes the first target’s body armour. The second vic- 
wielder may try again on their next turn. Specifically barbed weap- tim however, only suffers half damage due to attenuation or slowing 
ons (such as harpoons) inflict normal damage. Armour does not down of the shot. Overpenetration is generally of more use with 
reduce withdrawal damage. Whilst it remains impaled, the attacker high powered weapons that inflict large amounts of damage or those 
cannot use his impaling weapon for parrying. which have some sort of armour piercing ability. Any special effects 

inflicted on the first target are not applied to the second. 
KIiLlLl SIilLeEnNTtLlyY 

Restricted to those trained in a Combat Style with the Assassina- PinN DoowwnnN 
tion benefit. It allows the attacker to neutralise a victim in complete Similar to Press Advantage, this special effect forces the target to 
silence, covering their mouth or grasping them about the neck whilst make an Opposed Test of their Willpower against the attacker’s hit 
simultaneously stabbing, cutting or garrotting them. This prevents roll. Failure means that the target hunkers down behind whatever 
the victim from crying out or otherwise raising an alarm for the cover is available, and cannot return fire on their next Turn. Note 
entire round. In addition, if during this time the attacks inflict a Seri- that Pin Down works even if no actual damage is inflicted on the tar- 
ous or Major Wound, the victim will automatically fail its Endur- get (perhaps due to a successful evasion or shots striking their cover 
ance roll. Kill Silently can only be used on a surprised opponent, instead), as it relies on the intimidation effect of projectiles passing 
and only on the first attack against them. very close by. 

Although a pinned victim is unable to fire back for the requi- 
MAaRrKkSsmMAaNn site time, they can perform other actions provided they don’t expose 

Permits the shooter to move the Hit Location struck by his shot themselves to fire in the process, such as crawling away to new cover, 
by one step, to an immediately adjoining body area. Physiology has communicating with others, reloading a weapon, and so on. 
an effect on what can be re-targeted, and common sense should be 
applied. Thus using this special effect on a humanoid would permit PiNn WEeAaPpOoNn 
an attacker who rolled a leg shot, to move it up to the abdomen On a critical the character can pin one of his opponent’s weap- 
instead. Conversely shooting a griffin in the chest would permit ons or shield, using his body or positioning to hold it in place. On his 
selection of the forelegs, wings or head. turn the opponent may attempt to wrestle or manoeuvre the pinned 

item free. This costs an Action Point and works as per the Grip spe- 
Maaxxiimmiisse DAaMmAaGgEe cial effect. Failure means that the pinned item remains unusable. In 

On a critical the character may substitute one of his weapon’s the meantime, an opponent lacking a weapon or shield in the other 
damage dice for its full value. For example a Hatchet which nor- hand may only avoid an attack by evading, using his Unarmed skill 
mally does 1d6 damage would instead be treated as a 6, whereas a or disengaging completely. 
great club with 2d6 damage would instead inflict 1d6+6 damage. 
This special effect may be stacked. Although it can also be used for PRrEePpaARrEe COoUuNnTtEeRr 
natural weapons, Maximise Damage does not affect the Damage The defender reads the patterns of his foe and pre-plans a 
Modifier of the attacker, which must be rolled normally. counter against a specific Special Effect (which should be noted 

down in secret). If his opponent attempts to inflict the chosen Spe- 
OPpEeNn RAaNnGgEe cial Effect upon him during the fight, the defender instantly substi- 

Permits the character to automatically change the engagement tutes the attackers effect with an offensive or defensive one of his 
range between himself and his opponent, so that they end up at the own, which succeeds automatically. 
Range favoured by the longer weapon (see (sce Weapon Reach - 
Closing and Opening Range page 106). PRrEeSsSs ADdVvAaNnTtAaGgEe 

The attacker pressures his opponent, so that his foe is forced to 
OVvEeRrEeXxTteEnNdD OPpPpOoNnEeNnTt remain on the defensive, and cannot attack on their next turn. This 

The defender sidesteps or retreats at an inconvenient moment, allows the attacker to potentially establish an unbroken sequence 
causing the attacker to overreach himself. Opponent cannot attack of attacks whilst the defender desperately blocks. It is only effective 
on his next turn. This special effect can be stacked. against foes concerned with defending themselves. 

OVvEeRrPpEeNnEeTtRrAaTtIioOnN 
If shooting at lineally positioned opponents or into a densely 

packed group, this special effect allows the shot to travel completely 

98



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

RAaPpIidD REeLloOaAdD Sulpipr FRree 
When using a ranged weapon, the attacker reduces the reload On a critical the defender can automatically escape being Entan- 

time for the next shot by one. This effect can be stacked. gled, Gripped, or Pinned. 

REeMmIiSsEe StTaAnNdD Fast 
The attacker performs a sequential follow-up attack with a The defender braces himself against the force of an attack, allow- 

weapon of size Small on his opponent’s next turn, which forces the ing them to avoid the Knockback effects of any damage received. 
foe to change their proactive action into a reactive one. 

StTuUnN LocAaTtioOnN 
ScaAr FoEe The attacker can use a bludgeoning weapon to temporarily 

The opponent is given a scar that will disfigure them for the stun the body part struck. If the blow overcomes Armour Points 
rest of their life, for example a slice across the face, or an artfully and injures the target, the defender must make an opposed roll of 
inscribed letter across the chest. Endurance vs. the original attack roll. If the defender fails, then the 

Hit Location is incapacitated for a number of turns equal to the 
SEeLleEcCtT TaARrGgEeTt damage inflicted. A blow to the torso causes the defender to stagger 

When an attacker fumbles, the defender may manoecuvre or winded, only able to defend. A head shot renders the foe briefly 
deflect the blow in such a way that it hits an adjacent bystander insensible. 
instead. This requires that the new target is within reach of the 
attacker’s close combat weapon, or in the case of a ranged attack, is SuUNnDdEeRr 
standing along the line of fire. The new victim is taken completely The attacker may use a suitable weapon to damage the armour 
by surprise by the unexpected accident, and has no chance to avoid or natural protection of an opponent. Any weapon damage, after 
the attack which automatically hits. In compensation however, they reductions for parrying or magic, is applied against the Armour Point 
suffer no special effect. value of the protection. Surplus damage in excess of its Armour 

Points is then used to reduce the AP value of that armour(ed) loca- 
tion — ripping straps, bursting rings, creasing plates or tearing away 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

SPpEeCcIiaALl EFfFfEeCcTtSs SuUmMMmAaRrYy 
Special Effect Offensive Defensive Specific Weapon Type Specific Roll Stackable 

Accidental Injury X Attacker Fumbles 

Arise X 

Bash X Shields or Bludgeoning 
Bleed Cutting Weapons 

Blind Opponent X Defender Criticals 
Bypass Armour Attacker Criticals X 

Choose Location See Description 

Circumvent Cover Ranged Weapons 

Circumvent Parry Attacker Criticals 

Close Range 

Compel Surrender 

Damage Weapon 

Disarm Opponent 

Drop Foe Ranged Weapons 

Duck Back Ranged Weapons 

Enhance Parry X Defender Ciriticals 

Entangle X Entangling Weapons 

Flurry Unarmed X 

Force Failure X Opponent Fumbles 

Grip Unarmed 

Impale Impaling Weapons 

Kill Silently Small Weapons See Description 

Marksman Ranged Weapons 

Maximise Damage Attacker Criticals X 

Open Range X 

Overextend Opponent X X 

Overpenetration Ranged Weapons Critical Only 

Pin Down X Ranged Weapons X 

Pin Weapon Critical Only 

Prepare Counter X X 

Press Advantage 

Rapid Reload 

Remise Small Weapon Only 

Scar Foe 

Select Target Attacker Fumbles 

Slip Free Defender Criticals 

Stand Fast 

Stun Location Bludgeoning Weapons 

Sunder Axes, Two Handed Weapons 

Take Weapon Unarmed 

Trip Opponent 

Weapon Malfunction Ranged Weapons Attacker Fumbles 

Withdraw X 

100

A KA A A KA < < A A M A S A RB A I  < 

A A KA < A KA 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
One of the centawrs battling Master Zamothis becomes infuriated at the CLlosse COoMmBbAaTt 

grizzled warrior’s near impenetrable defence. When 1t finally rolls a critical Close combat is hand to hand fighting in its classic sense, when 

attack, Zamothis once again parries with his Hoplite shield which would nor- combatants strike each other with wielded or natural weapons. 

mally be enough to block any damage from the centaur’s great club. So rather Although the basic combat rules have been described previously, 

than attacking the warrior;, the enraged beast aims for the shield instead, and this section further details a number of tactical and environmental 

selects Damage Weapon as its effect. The blowfrom the club inflicts 11 points situations which may affect those in close combat. 

of damage which when applied to the shield, overcomes its 6 Armour Points The following guidelines offer ways to make close combat more 

and reduces it to 10 Hit Points. The resulting cracking noise alerts Master interesting and help to further explain some concepts hinted at ear- 

Lamothis, who realises he will soon be in serwous trouble.. lier in this chapter. 

Meanwhile, Anathaym culs theyouth fiee, but as he flees to the entrance 
of the canyon, one of the centaurs spots the escape and closes in for an attack, SIitTuUaAtTiIoOnNaALl MOoDIdFifIiEeRrSs 
waving a dangerous looking halberd in wide circles above its head. Anathaym The Situational Modifiers table (see overleaf) provides some 
inderposes herself; and engages the savage warrior in combat. Rolls are made common situational modifiers that may be applied when fighting in 
resulting in Anathaym gaining a normal success, and the centaurfumbling! particular situations, or as the result of a Special Effect. 

With two special effects to select, Anathaym decides she doesn’t want to be Unless stated otherwise, these modifiers are applied to attacking, 
it by the halberd so chooses Disarm Opponent and Force Failure. Normally parrying, and evading equally. The difficulty grade column sug- 
this would prove troublesome for the heroine, her shortsword suffering signifi- gests a suitable skill penalty for that situation. Where two or more 
cant penalties to knock the larger weapon out of the centaur’s hands. However, situations are pertinent to the character, use the most severe. See 
because she has also taken Force Failure, the centaur automatically fails the Modifying Skills page 38. 
opposed roll and his weapon clatters to the ground, leaving fam unarmed. 

CLloosesEe COoMmBbAaTt SIitTuUaAtTiIoOnNaALl MOoDIdFifIiEeRrSs 

the hide, scales or chitin of monsters. If any damage remains after Situation Difficulty Grade 

the protection has been reduced to zero AP, it carries over onto the Attacking a helpless target Automatic 

Hit Points of the location struck. 
Attacking in a confined situation Hard 

TaAKkEe WEeAaPpOoNn Defending while on lower ground or against mounted 
Hard 

foe 
Allows an unarmed character to yank or twist an opponent’s 

weapon out of his hand. The opponent must make an opposed roll Tighting while on unstable ground Hard 

of his Combat Style against the character’s original Unarmed roll. Tighting whilst crouching or from one knee Hard 

If the target loses, his weapon is taken and from that moment on, Tighting in poor visibility (thick fog, snowstorm) Hard 

may be used by the character instead. Take Weapon differs from Defending against an attack from behind Tormidable 

Disarm Opponent in that the size of the weapon is largely irrele- Tighting while prone Tormidable 

vant. However, the technique only works on creatures of up to twice Tighting in partial darkness (dim illumination) Tormidable 
the attacker’s STR 

Tighting in pitch black conditions (no illumination at 
Herculean 

all) 
TriiPp OPpPpOoNnEeNnTt 

Blinded or loss of primary perceptive sense Herculean 
The character attempts to overbalance or throw his opponent to 

the ground. The opponent must make an opposed roll of his Brawn, 
Evade or Acrobatics against the character’s original roll. If the target 
fails, he falls prone. Quadruped opponents (or creatures with even EnNGgAaGgEemMEeNnTt 
more legs) may substitute their Athletics skill for Evade, and treat the An important concept of close combat is that of Engagement. A 

roll as one difficulty grade easier. character is considered Engaged if he is within melee weapon range 
of his opponent. This does not necessarily require that both combat- 

WEeAaPpOoNn MAaLlFfUuNnCcTtIioOnN (FFiIrReEaArRmMSs)) ants can reach each other; only that one of them can be potentially 
The attacker’s weapon malfunctions in such a way that it is ren- struck by the other. 

dered useless until time can be spent repairing it. Once a character has engaged with an opponent he can no 
longer freely depart that fight (Charging is a special exception). It 

WIiTthHdDrRaAwW requires some form of deliberate act to break contact with the foe, 
The defender may automatically withdraw out of reach, break- who might not wish to allow him to depart. This is normally per- 

ing off engagement with that particular opponent. formed via a combat action such as Change Range or Outmanoeu- 
vre, but sometimes an unexpected chance to disengage occurs by use 
of a Special Effect. Fleeing from a battle requires that engagement 
is broken first. 

Certain circumstances will allow a character to engage with mul- 
tiple foes simultaneously, provided the enemy are in close proximity 
with each other. This can occur in many ways, for instance closing 
with a line of soldiers blocking a bridge, or jumping down into the 

101



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

middle of a tight packed rabble. In such situations not only does the ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
character have the option of which foe he strikes, but the reverse is Although disarmed the centaur v still dangerous. On its next turn it clips 
also true. Anathaym with a hoof sending her reeling backwards, momentarily stunned. 

Withdrawing from Engagement in this circumstance depends on When she gathers her senses she sees that herfoe has galloped off to pluck up 
the distribution of foes. Obviously retreating from the middle of a a lance, and is now galloping back towards her; weapon levelledfor a charge! 
pack will be near impossible, whilst withdrawing from an organised Cursing that she only brought her peltast shield, Anathaym realises that 
formation might be automatic, providing the enemy doesn’t wish to attempting to parry the lance would resull in the weapon passing right through 
break ranks. the shield (shield size Large versus a lance size Huge, but boosted to size 

Enormous during a charge). Not wishing to be impaled she decides to try and 

CLlosse COoMmBbAaTt MEeCcHhAaNnIiCcSs dwe clear. The centaur makes an opposed roll of his weapon skill against 

The remainder of this section provides further guidelines con- Anathaym’s Evade. Both achieve normal successes but Anathaym gets the 

cerning combat under different tactical circumstances. agher 1ol and leaps clear;, ending up prone. On her next turn she regains her 
Jeet, but by this time the centaur has been carried clear by the speed of us 

CHhAaRrGgIinNGg attack, and is now slowing in preparationfor another charge... 
Charging is the act of moving quickly to increase the force and Fearing that she will eventually fail if forced to keep on evading, Ana- 

impact of an attack. There are two main types of charging, depend- thaym looks aroundf rantically for some other option, and spols the halberd she 
ing on whether the attacker wishes to stop in engagement range with earlier knocked from the centaur’s grasp. She quickly grabs the weapon and, 
the target or continue sweeping past, through or over the target. using 1t like a speas; sets it to receive charge then braces herself; completing her 

The common principles of a charge are as follows: arrangements just before the centaur contacts her again. 
Since both weapons are of equal reach, the Games Master declares that 

& A charge requires at least one full Combat Round of move- 
the attacks are simultaneous. The centaur’s attack s rolledf ust, and to Ana- 

ment at running or sprinting speed prior to contact 
thaym’s great relief the mighty beast just misses her with is lance, thanks to 

& A charge imposes a penalty to the attack roll, increasing it by 
the attack difficulty being raised to Hard. Her own attack us a hit however, 

one difficulty grade 
and since the halberd is set she uses the centaur’s own Damage Modifier 

& A charge increases a bipedal attacker’s Damage Modifier by against uself; in this case 1d8 (1d4 increased by two steps for the charge). 
one step; or the Damage Modifier of four (or more) legged T s added to the 1d8+2 for the halberd, and the special effectfor not defend- 
creatures by two steps. In addition, the Size of the attacking 

ing, Anathaym impales the weapon through the centaur’s chestfor 14 points 
weapon is improved by one step of damage, giving it a Major Wound. T he centaur collapses in gouts of blood, 

The recipient of a charge has three options; attempt to parry, unable to continue the fight. 

evade or simultaneously counterattack the charging attacker. 
Parrying a charge attack holds some significant risks, depend- great-axe, throwing himself at a shield wall, hoping that the impetus 

ing on the size and strength of the attacker. The primary danger is of his charge will help him smash through the defender’s shield or 
suffering knockback, which may leave a victim prone even if they knock him over. 
suffer no other damage from the impact. Use of the Brace combat Once the charge strikes home, the attacker is considered engaged 
action in advance of the charge attack can help mitigate the effects with his opponent. From that moment on combat proceeds normally. 
of knockback. The secondary threat comes from the bonus to the All benefits gained from the charge are lost after the first attack. 
charger’s weapon size, which may permit a blow to penetrate or 
overcome the defender’s parrying weapon. CHhAaRrGgIinNGg tThHrRoOuUgGhH COoNnTtAaCcTt 

Evading a charge attack is more of a gamble, but in some cir- The second type of charge is one which uses the momentum to 
cumstances may be the only option. The defender must make an carry the attacker through, and clear of an engagement. It is nor- 
opposed roll of his Evade skill versus the charging opponent’s com- mally limited to mounted combatants or creatures of significant size 
bat skill. If the defender wins he throws himself completely clear of unlikely to be hindered by an impact with smaller foes. For instance 
the charge, otherwise he is hit. Any difference in Level of Success an enraged aurochs could quite easily charge through a group of 
results in Special Effects as normal. warriors, tossing or trampling over a victim as it passes, before con- 

Counterattacking sacrifices the defender’s opportunity to actively tinuing on out of close combat range. 

defend against the charge in exchange for a chance to injure the The speed of such charges prevents the attacker and defender 
attacker. In such cases both sides are treated as having failed to parry, from exchanging more than a single action with each other, namely 
although they can still benefit from Passive Blocking. The wielder of the charge attack, and the defender’s reaction to it (Parry, Evade 
the weapon with the longest Reach strikes first, potentially hindering or Counterattack). Since the charge attack occurs on the attack- 
his opponent from launching the subsequent blow. If using long- er’s turn, they will have already been carried clear by the time the 
shafted impaling weapons which can be ‘set’ against a charge, the defender’s turn arrives. 
defender may substitute his own Damage Modifier for that of the Note that charges are not limited to just running, but can be per- 
charging opponent (or its mount if the attacker is riding). formed by flying or swimming creatures in the relevant environment. 

CHhAaRrGgIinNgG iInNtToO COoNnTtAaCcTt COoVvEeRr 
Some charges are intended as a method to crash into an oppo- Cover is used by opponents to obstruct attacks against them, 

nent, then remain in place to take advantage of any chaos caused. whether from ranged or close combat. This occurs by either phys- 

An example of this would be a barbarian warrior, armed with a ically blocking a blow due to the toughness of the interposing 

102



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

material, or by obscuring where precisely the foe is. For example a 
Evading Creatures

guard standing behind a crenellated wall may have his lower body VADING REATURES 
Creatures that lack thick natural armour to bull through attacks, or 

shielded, whereas a thief hiding somewhere behind a curtain may 
the intellect or skill to actively parry them, are oflenforced to evade in close 

be hidden from direct attack. The precise value of cover depends on 
combat in order lo defend themselves. 

the thickness of its protection and the extent of its coverage. 
1In these circumstances, most creatures lacking humanoidf orm, quad- 

In the case of partial cover, any attack against a target which 
rupeds or serpents_for example, have an inherent advantage over bipedal 

lands on an obscured Hit Location will be blocked to the extent 
characters; in that they rarely go prone when evading, due to their shape 

of the cover’s inherent protection. Thus in the case of the guard 
or multiple limbs. 

covered by the crenellated wall, any attack which would normally 
As a rule of thumb, whenever such a creature attempls lo evade an 

hit his abdomen or legs would be stopped by the stone fortification. 
attack, they only end up prone if they fail their Evade roll (the skill check, 

The effects of cover can be partially negated either by use of the 
not the opposed test). 

Choose Location special effect to aim at visible parts of the target; 
or striking through the cover if the weapon is capable of penetrating . 4 
it. When using ranged weapons however, Choose Location normally 
requires a critical success, which makes taking cover against missiles prone character from regaining their feet. Nothing prevents a prone 

extremely worthwhile. character from attempting to evade subsequent attacks, with the 

In situations where cover is total but the attacker knows his attack proviso that they suffer a ‘Fighting while prone’ situational penalty 

will penetrate, he may strike blindly at the hidden target. In such as they continue to roll aside or scrabble backwards away from their 

cases the attack roll is one grade harder, and Choose Location may attacker. 

not be taken if a special effect is won. This assumes the cover is 
FLlyYiInNgG COoMmBbAaTt 

not so extensive as to permit the target to move freely behind it. 
Fighting against flying creatures, and full scale aerial battles pro- 

Thus, someone lurking behind a small bush could still be attacked, 
vide a rather interesting dynamic to close combat, since most air- 

even though the attacker might not be able to see his quarry, but if 
borne creatures require constant movement to remain aloft. 

he was behind a lengthy hedge his position could not be accurately 
predicted. 

ATtTtAaCcKkIinNgG GRrOoUuNnDd--BBAaSsEedD TAaRrGgEeTtSs 

EvaADdIinNgG It can be difficult for ground-based characters to defeat airborne 
 

foes. Of course in some encounters the flying creature will hover or 
Protecting oneself from attacks such as volleys of ranged weap- 

land on the combatant, allowing combat to proceed normally. In 
ons, headlong charging beasts, and even destructive magical spells 

others the flying creature may fly back and forth, sweeping down 
can be exceptionally difficult, especially if the consequences will 

to make attacks before continuing back out of range. In the latter 
overwhelm or ignore a shield. In these situations often the best thing 

situation it is recommended that each ‘strafing’ run is treated as 
for a character to do is fling themselves to the side or dive behind 

Charging through Contact, see Charging page 102. This can make 
cover to escape. This is known as evading. 

airborne creatures deadly opponents unless ground based defenders 
Evasion attempts require an opposed roll of the attacker’s per- 

have some sort of ranged weaponry or cover. 
tinent skill versus the Evade skill of the defender. This could be 
anything from the Drive roll of a charioteer to the spell casting roll 

AEeRrIiAaLl COoMmBbAaTt ALlOoFfTt 
of a magician. If the attacker wins then they inflict damage as per 

Combat between aerial creatures or characters mounted on 
normal. If the defender wins damage is completely avoided. What- 

flying beasts should be handled slightly differently. Unlike ground 
ever the result, the evasive gambit leaves the defender prone, usually 

based fighting it often takes a significant period of time to jockey 
requiring him to regain his footing on his following turn. 

into a position where one airborne opponent can assault the other. 
If the winner of the opposed roll achieves one or more levels of 

Each brief engagement only allows one of them to attack before the 
success over his opponent, they may select suitable Special Effects as 

flying creatures travel apart, requiring them to manoeuvre again to 
per normal combat. 

see which gets the upper hand in the next pass. 
Evading may be made more difficult or rendered impossible 

Thus at the start of each round combatants must make an 
depending on the circumstances: 

opposed roll of their Fly skills (or Ride if a mount). The winner is 

& The character is helpless or entangled the one who can attack that round. If facing multiple opponents use 

& There is nowhere to evade to (balancing on a ledge whilst a group opposed roll, and all those who beat the lone participant 

scaling a cliff, for example) 
& A mounted character may only evade by flinging themselves 

clear of the saddle AEeRrIiAaLl TAaCcTtIiCcSs 
Airborne combat can be spiced up by introducing terrain and environ- 

Evading is not normally performed in close combat due to its mentalf actors. Clouds can be usedf or ambushes or places to escape battle. 
inherent disadvantages. However, a character facing a hand-to-hand Tall buzldings and narrow canyons can offer a dramatic setting in which to 
attack against which he has no applicable defence due to the lack of set chases, with the participants playing a deadly game of chicken if they 
a weapon (or an inferior sized one which won’t block the damage) Jail ther flying or riding rolls. An aerial battle could even involve support 
may have no other choice. Jure from the ground, forcing combatants to hoard their Action Points to 

In such cases evading provides only a temporary respite from evade deadly ballista bolts whilst trying to beat theirflying opponents. 
a determined opponent who decides to follow up, preventing the 

N 4 

103



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

may attack it that round. Attacks are resolved in a similar manner Movement value) than the opponent, and the mount itself is 
to charges, the recipient allowed to parry, evade or counterattack. not engaged in attacking. 

In the case of particularly large creatures or those travelling at & A mounted warrior may, at the cost of an Action Point, sub- 
high speed, the Games Master may wish to increase the manoeu- stitute either his own Combat Style or Ride skill instead of his 
vring time between passes, for example perhaps 1d3 rounds for a mount’s, to defend it against attacks. 
griffon or 1d6 rounds for a dragon. In these cases it is wise to limit & A mounted warrior may combine his SIZ with his mount’s for 
mounted archers or spell casters to acting on each pass, since most the purposes of avoiding Knockback, provided he passes an 
of the intervening time the rider will be thrown about in aerial acro- unopposed Ride roll. 
batics or the enemy target will be out of range. & A mounted warrior may, when charging with a braced 

weapon, substitute his own Damage Modifier for that of his 
KNnOoCcKkBbAaCcKk mount. A weapon braced for a charging attack cannot be 

An attack which imparts more damage than the SIZ of the recip- used to parry. If the weapon impales it must be left in the 
ient will, by default, result in him being knocked back. The dam- body of the target, or else break or dismount the rider as the 
age in this circumstance is before any reduction due to parrying or mount continues past. 
armour. On receiving such a blow, the recipient must pass an easy 
Acrobatics or standard Athletics roll to avoid falling prone. They are 

MuurtltiippLlEe OPpPpOoNnEeNnTtSs 
also thrust backwards one metre for each five points of damage (or 

Facing multiple opponents in MYTHRAS is often exceptionally 
fraction thereof) in excess of their SIZ. Proactively using the Brace 

dangerous. Whilst a character suffers no specific penalties to his 
combat action can reduce or even negate the effects of knockback. 

combat skills, he can soon become swamped by his opponents and 
Knockback differs from the Bash special effect in that Knock- 

rapidly run out of Action Points with which to defend himself. Once 
back is the automatic and accidental side effect of tremendously 

all his actions have been expended the character is treated as having 
powerful blows, whilst a Bash is a deliberate technique which relies 

failed his parry roll against any subsequent attacks, which in addition 
on timing and leverage. 

to any damage inflicted also leaves him vulnerable to Special Effects. 

LeEaAPpIinNgG ATtTtAaCcKkSs The best tactics to use against being outnumbered are: 

There are some animals, monsters, and even people who leap 
& Constrain the avenue of attack so that fewer opponents can 

upon their victims in order to knock them prone. Leaping attacks 
engage simultaneously 

can be launched from a variety of situations, but most are triggered 
& Tight as a formation to place disordered opponents at a 

as part of an ambush or at the conclusion of a charge. A few crea- 
disadvantage 

tures have the ability to leap atop an opponent without the need for 
& Outmanoeuvre around multiple opponents so that they inter- 

a run-up or superior height. 
fere with one another 

A leaping attack is resolved with an opposed roll of the leap- 
& Withdraw then flee the combat as quickly as possible 

er’s Athletics skill versus the defender’s Brawn or Evade skill. If the 
leaper wins then the defender is automatically knocked prone, with 
the attacker astride them. If the attack fails, the defender has weath- OUuTtMmAaNnOoEeUuVvRrIinNGg 
ered or sidestepped the impact. If the winner of the opposed roll A character facing multiple opponents can use movement to 

achieves one or more levels of success over his opponent, they may limit the number which can attack him at any one moment in time. 

select suitable Special Effects as per normal combat. This works by constantly shifting position, forcing some foes to 

No damage is inflicted as part of the leap; however a sub- start running around the flanks of their companions to re-establish 

sequently prone victim cannot recover his footing until either his reach or lines of attack, generally causing them to interfere with one 

attacker leaves him, or he eventually wins a Special Effect permitting another. Outmanoeuvring requires that the character has room to 

him to Arise. move about, and is not pinned in a confining area. It also assumes 

If the target is a quadruped, then it may substitute Athletics for that the character is engaged with the entire group of foes, rather 

Evade, and makes the attacker’s initial Athletics roll one difficulty than a specific individual. 

grade harder. In addition, leaping attacks only work against oppo- An example of outmanoeuvring in action would be a group of 

nents of up to twice the attacker’s SIZ. A target can make themselves guards trying to arrest a drunken barbarian in a tavern. The warrior 

more difficult to knock down by proactive use of the Brace combat could manoeuvre around the tables, chairs, and roof supports to 

action, provided they are aware of the impending leap attack. block the majority of his foes whilst he whittles them down one by 
one. 

MOoUuNnTtEeDd COoMmBbAaTt Outmanoeuvring requires that the character engages his oppo- 
Unless learned as part of specifically mounted combat styles (see nents in a group opposed roll of Evade skills. Every participant, both 

Combat Style Benefits page 88), the combat skills of a rider may the manoeuvring character and those foes who wish to corner him, 
not exceed their Ride skill. The advantages of being mounted are must spend an Action Point. Then they each roll once, and those 
considerable however: who fail to beat the manoeuvring character’s roll cannot attack him 

for the remainder of that Combat Round, being blocked by their 
& A mounted warrior rolls a 1D10+10 for the Hit Location of 

allies or terrain features. 
bipedal creatures, provided the target is lower than the rider. 

If the manoeuvring character beats all of his opponents he has 
& A mounted warrior can withdraw freely from engagement on 

the choice of safely engaging a single foe for the rest of the round or 
his turn provided his mount moves faster (i.e. has a higher 

Withdrawing from the fight completely. 

104



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

PAaSsSsIivVEe BLloOCcKkIinNgG or Insight versus Deceit for a betrayal. Difficulty modifiers should 

Passive Blocking is the placement of weapons and shields in such be applied in situations where the target is hindered, such as being 

a manner so that they effectively act as cover. Characters armed inebriated or dozing lightly. Conversely a bonus should be applied if 

with a weapon may hold it in such a way that it covers a chosen the target is suspicious or forewarned. If the target wins the opposed 

location (or locations when using a shield), but at the cost of being roll then the effects of surprise are negated. 

unable to actively parry with it (see Ward Location page 93). Any 
SwWEeEePp ATtTtAaCcKkSs 

attack which hits those locations automatically receives the benefit 
Sweep attacks occur when weapons or creatures of unusual size 

of the weapon or shield, reducing damage as normal. The tech- 
attack a closely clumped group of opponents — the scything tail of 

nique is commonly used when a warrior wishes to guard a weak spot 
a huge dragon for example — striking several foes simultaneously. A 

or wounded location. 
sweep attack is made by applying a single attack roll of the weapon 

It may seem paradoxical to sacrifice the ability to parry, poten- 
or creature to all targets in its path. Each defender must resolve the 

tially opening up a passively blocking character to an unopposed 
effects of the attack separately, and any special effects imposed on 

attack. However there are many situations it is a valid tactic: for 
the attacker are treated as having occurred concurrently. 

example when used by inexperienced troops or those lacking full sets 
Sweep attacks can also be used for other ‘area affect’ assaults, such 

of armour. In addition there is nothing which prevents a two weap- 
as the overhead smash of a giant’s tree trunk club or the unstoppable 

ons or weapon and shield combatant from using his other weapon 
charge of a giant triceratops. The games master decides how many 

to actively parry. 
foes are caught in the attack based upon the length or trajectory of 

Since passive blocking works in the same way as cover, the 
weapon, and his visualisation of the conflict. 

Choose Location special effect cannot be used to bypass the block in 
close combat, though opponents can still use the effect to strike other 

UNnAaRrMmEeDd COoMmBbAaTt 
unblocked areas. Assuming a shield, passive blocking against missiles 

Unarmed combat is the default Combat Style available to any 
becomes even better, since for ranged weapons Choose Location is 

person or creature, which covers the skill of fighting using only the 
a critical only. 

limbs and natural armaments of their own body. Some beasts have 
Crouching down behind a shield allows a character to double the 

a variety of natural weapons, each with a different reach and size, 
number of locations covered whilst passive blocking. 

which can make larger creatures particularly dangerous — able to 

PuLlLleEdD BLlows stand off’ at longer range, and still launch blows capable of smash- 
ing through the stoutest shields. The unarmed combat techniques 

Occasionally a character may wish to avoid maiming or killing 
used by animals and monsters are examined in more detail in the 

an opponent. This is achieved by ‘pulling’ a blow, limiting the force 
Creatures chapter. 

placed behind it or striking with a less lethal part of the weapon. A 
Although unarmed combat seems superfluous for warriors who 

pulled blow halves the damage inflicted on a successful hit. However, 
utilise weapons, it still provides a number of advantages: 

the intent to pull a blow must be stated before the attack is made, 
since it is near impossible to withhold a fully committed strike once & Unarmed combat can be used interchangeably with any 
it has been launched. other weapon style, provided the target is within reach of the 

attacker’s natural weapons. 
SUuRrPpRrIiSsEe 

& Unarmed combat can be used offensively for either strik- 
Surprise occurs when an unexpected attack is launched against 

ing or grappling an opponent. It is important for the user to 
opponents unaware of the attacker’s presence or intention. An 

declare which he intends in advance, since the resolution of 
ambush would be an example of the former, whilst treacherously 

each is handled slightly differently. 
turning on an unsuspecting ally during amiable conversation illus- 

& Unarmed combat can be used defensively to parry a weapon 
trates the latter. 

attack. Damage is reduced as per normal, according to the 
The effects of surprise on a target are potent: 

comparative Sizes of the natural and wielded weapon. Even 

& The target suffers a -10 penalty to initiative if no damage was stopped, the parry attempt might still pre- 

& Until their Initiative arrives they are considered flat footed vent the defender from suffering one or more Special Effects. 

and cannot defend themselves 
Note that if an unarmed combatant can step within the reach of 

& The first attack on the target, if’ successful, gains a bonus Spe- 
an armed opponent, he will reduce the effective Size of his oppo- 

cial Effect 
nent’s weapon, making it quite possible to parry blows without suf- 

& For the remainder of the round they may not perform any 
fering injury. 

offensive action 

PAaRrRrYyIinNgG WEeAaPpOoNnSs WHhILilSsTt UNnAaRrMmEeDd 
For example, an assassin who sneaks up on an oblwious guard, wins the ini- 

As previously described a Parry is actually a combination of par- 
tiative, and successfully strikes from behind would gain two special effects — one 

rying, blocking, and footwork to deflect the force of a blow. It is not 
Jor the attack’s success against the guard’s automatic failure; and a bonus onefor 

simply interposing an object into the path of an attack to stop it 
surprising um. If the assassin were using a dagger he could then choose Select 

dead — for example using a forearm to block the sweep of a sword — 
Locatwon: head, and Kill Silently, quietly stabbing the guard in the throat. 

since such an action would likely result in a mangled arm. 
As surprise can be so devastating, targets of such an attack should 

Instead most unarmed and armed combat styles use more sub- 
be permitted a chance to detect the impending conflict. For instance, 

tle techniques to gain maximum deflection for the minimum risk. 
an ambush might allow an opposed roll of Perception versus Stealth; 

Examples include, but are not limited to: Pressing against the hand 

105



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

or hilt of a weapon to change its line of attack, stepping very close to CLlIimMBbIinNgG 
cut down angular momentum of swung weapons, deflecting thrusts A climbing character has all of his combat skills capped by the 
by knocking aside the point or haft, or even grabbing a weapon on value of his Athletics skill. Bipedal characters are limited to fighting 
the haft or blade near its grip. with a single limb, requiring the other three to remain clinging to the 

Such methods rely on several points however; firstly that the par- vertiginous surface they are scaling. 
rying creature is intelligent enough to understand and use said tech- 
niques, and secondly that they are within unarmed range. The latter SwWIimMMmIinNGg 
point is perhaps the most crucial, and demonstrates the dangers of A swimming character has all of his combat skills capped by the 
facing an armed opponent with a longer reach. value of his Swim skill. Since water (and other fluids) impose signif- 

icant drag, only thrusting weapons are effective whilst submerged, 
STtRrIikKiInNgG and even those are reduced to half damage. Other weapons are 

Using unarmed combat to throw simple damage-inflicting strikes slowed to the point of impotence. Unarmed combat attacks which 
is resolved in the same way as normal weapon attacks. Some Special involve biting, strangulation or ramming are unaffected. 
Effects are specifically reserved for unarmed combat, namely Flurry, 
Grip, and Take Weapon. 

Calculating the damage, Size and Reach of natural weapons is WEeAaPpOoNn REeAaCchH –— CLlOoSsIinNgG 

defined on page 222 of the Creatures chapter. Human unarmed 
aAnNDd OPpEeNnIinNGg RAaNnGgEe 

attacks, for instance, have a size of Small, reach of Touch, and inflict 
Weapon Reach, and its associated mechanics for Closing and 

1d3 damage. 
Opening Range are optional rules for those desiring more realistic 

Some creature’s natural weapons and unarmed combat styles 
combat. 

may add other effects or impart inherent Special Effects on a suc- 
In general terms when two combatants face one another armed 

cessful strike. For example the gripping jaws of a crocodile or the 
with weapons of greatly disproportionate reach, the wielder of the 

poisoned stinger of a giant scorpion. 
longer weapon can keep his opponent at bay, preventing him from 

GRrAaPpPpLlI attacking. If however, the wielder of the shorter weapon can step 
inNgG 

Grappling attacks are resolved using an opposed roll of the attack- inside the effective reach of the longer, then the tables turn and the 

er’s Unarmed skill versus the combat skill used by the defender. If combatant with the longer weapon will find himself unable to parry 

the attacker wins then they establish the grapple, but if the defender with that weapon. 

wins the grapple fails. As with Evade, if one of the combatants The following rules assume a Reach difference of two or more 

achieves one or more levels of success over his opponent, they may steps between the longer and shorter weapon. Thus a dagger (Short) 

select an equal number of Special Effects. against a falchion (Medium) would suffer no penalties in combat, 

The effects of grappling depend on the location struck. A grap- whereas the same dagger against a great axe (Long) would. 

pled limb is rendered inoperable whilst grappling the head or torso 
FiIgGhHTtIinNgG AaTt TthHEe LoONnGgEeRr REeAaCchH 

imposes a difficulty penalty of Hard against any skill the opponent 
If fighting at the Reach of the longer weapon, then the user of 

attempts. In addition, on his following turns the grappler may make 
the shorter weapon cannot directly attack the wielder of the longer. 

unarmed attacks to inflict damage (equal to his Damage Modi- 
They are still considered to be engaged since the longer weapon can 

fier) on the body part by crushing, twisting or strangulating it. The 
still reach them. 

defender may oppose with his own Unarmed or Brawn skill in order 
In this situation the user of the shorter weapon can attack the 

to reduce or block the damage. 
longer weapon of his opponent, try to close the range between them, 

A grapple continues until the victim manages to break free. 
or hope to win an applicable Special Effect. If the longer weapon is 

Escape attempts are performed on the victim’s turn using the Strug- 
in fact the natural armament of a creature with superior reach, such 

gle combat action. This requires an opposed roll of either Brawn or 
as the tentacle of a colossal squid, the user of the shorter weapon 

Unarmed against whichever of the two skills the grappler prefers. If 
can directly attack the limb assaulting them. 

the grappled victim wins, they manage to break free. Note that some 
The intimidating threat of longer reach is an inherent advantage 

attackers using Brawn may be so strong that no amount of brute 
of two handed weapons, which offsets the disadvantage of not using 

force or cunning technique can overcome their grip. 
a shield. 

Grappling requires that the limb or appendage is empty, and is 
capable of hooking, sticking or gripping. 

FiIgGhHTtIinNgG AaTt TthHEe ShHOoRrTtEeRr REeAaCchH 
In the converse situation where the fighters are engaged at the 

UNnUuSsUuAaLl CoMmBbAaTt COoNnDdIiTtIioONnSs Reach of the shorter weapon, the user of the longer weapon will 

There are certain circumstances and environments which may find he cannot parry the attacks of the shorter. 

prevent a character from fighting at his full ability. Several are spe- The user of the longer weapon can still attack with the haft or 

cifically noted below, but other situations may occur which aren’t hilt of his now encroached weapon, but its efficacy is significantly 

covered by the rules. In such cases the Games Master should apply reduced. In this circumstance the weapon’s Size is reduced as many 

similar rules as appropriate to the fight. For example, a battle upon steps as the difference between the two weapons’ Reach, and only 

a treacherously slippery ice floe may require that combat skills be inflicts 1d3+1 damage due to the necessity of striking with the haft, 

capped by Acrobatics. pommel, guard from an awkwardly cramped position. 

106



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

At this point the best option for the user of the longer weapon is 
to reopen the range between them, draw a shorter backup weapon, RAaNnGgEedD COoMmBbAaTt 
defend themselves with their Unarmed skill, or hope to win a useful Ranged combat incorporates all forms of weaponry which 
Special Effect. In a last ditch situation the encroached fighter can require to be shot, thrown or slung to strike their target. The ranged 
attempt to Evade instead. weapons a character can use are listed as part of their combat styles 

- anything from throwing stones to firing a huge trebuchet. 
CLlOoSsIinNgG RAaNnGgEe Ranged attacks are resolved in an identical way to close com- 
A character that is being held at range by a longer weapon must bat. However, ranged weapons can normally only be parried with 

close on his opponent before being able to attack him. Two methods shields; those without must rely on natural cover or use Evade to 
are available to do this. dive out of the line of fire. Thus against lightly armoured foes, 

ranged weapons can be formidable deterrents. 
& Close Range Special Effect — automatically closes, but cannot 

Each ranged weapon has a number of specific attributes which 
be used unless a character has generated an opportunity for 

determine its effectiveness. The ones which have a key bearing on 
a Special Effect. 

combat are as follows: 
& Change Range Combat Action — costs an Action Point, and 

is used on a character’s Turn. 
FOoRrrcCEe 

In the latter case of attempting to Change Range, the charac- The ranged weapon equivalent of Size. It measures the penetra- 

ter’s opponent has two options, described below. In both cases if tive power of that weapon or its ammunition to determine whether 

the opponent has no Action Points left — or chooses not to spend an the blow overcomes a (shield) parry. 

Action Point — then the attempt to close is automatically successful. 
DAaMmAaGgEe MOoDIdFifIiEeRr 

& The combatants match Evade skills in an opposed test. If the This attribute shows whether or not the Damage Modifier of the 
character initiating the Change Range action wins then he attacker can be used to boost the ranged weapon’s damage roll. In 
can close the range to a desired distance. If the opponent general only bows and thrown weapons allow the user to apply their 
wins then the existing range is maintained. Damage Bonus. 

& However, if the opponent decides to attack the closing char- 
acter instead, then he must make an opposed roll of his RAaNnGgEe 
combat skill versus the closing character’s Evade skill. If the Three numbers separated by slashes, representing the maximum 

opponent wins, he strikes the character; and any difference Close, Effective, and Long ranges of the weapon or its ammunition. 

in Level of Success results in Special Effects as per normal Close range is the distance over which the Choose Location special 

combat. Whether or not the blow lands, the closing character effect may be used, provided the target is stationary or unaware of 

bridges the distance, and gains the advantage of having the the impending attack. Effective range has no significant modifiers. 

shorter weapon. At long range the weapon can still inflict harm, but the amount of 
damage is halved and Force is reduced by one step. 

OPpEeNnIinNGg RAaNnGgEe REeLloOaAdD 
Opening Range works in the same way as Closing Range — but The time taken to reload a weapon which fires ammunition. 

obviously in reverse. The character can use Change Range to com- 
pletely withdraw from engagement. See Withdrawing below. 

SIitTuUaAtTiIoOnNaALl MOoDIdFifIiEeRrSs 

WIiTtHhDdRrAaWwIinNGg The table on page 108 provides some situational modifiers spe- 

Withdrawing from a fight means that the character extricates cific to ranged weapons. Where two or more situations are pertinent 

himself from close combat weapon range. This can be done in a myr- to the character, use the most severe. 

iad of ways, from physically pushing an opponent away, side-step- 
ping a committed attack or unexpectedly taking several large steps RAaNnGgEedD COoMmBbAaTt COoNnSsIiDdEeRrAaTtIioOnNSs 
backward. At this point they have not fled the battle entirely, but Whilst ranged weapons appear to be extraordinarily potent they 
have briefly opened up enough space to have disengaged that oppo- do suffer a number of restrictions, and have special rules covering 
nent, and consider new tactical options. their use. Specific notes concerning ranged attacks are as follows: 

Withdrawing is automatic when using the Withdraw special 
effect. Otherwise a character must attempt to break free by use of AIimMIinNgG 
the Change Range or Outmanoeuvre combat actions, in which case By spending additional time aiming a ranged weapon, a char- 
the opponent(s) may resist. acter can potentially increase his chance to hit. Aiming requires an 

Once he has disengaged himself, the withdrawing character may entire Combat Round steadying the weapon, and waiting for the 
on his next turn (for the cost of an Action Point): best opportunity to release, for example withholding a bowshot for 

a momentary lull in the wind or until a target moves between two 
& Reroll initiative 

obstructions. By aiming, the character may reduce the difficulty of a 
& Flee the battle entirely 

Situational Modifier by one grade. Additional rounds spend aiming 
« Seek out a new opponent to engage 

grant no further advantage. 
& Perform some other suitable act not covered here 

107



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

RAaNnGgEeDd COoMmBbAaTt SIitTuUaAtTiIoOnNaALl MOoDIdFifIiEeRrSs Tor characters with a more destructive bent, statistics for siege 

Situation Difficulty Grade engines are included in the Economics and Equipment chapter. 

Light Wind* Hard 
FIirRiInNgG iInNtToO Aa CRroOwWDd 

Moderate Wind* Tormidable Firing into the swirling ebb and flow of a melee can be a risky 
Strong Wind* Herculean business, even for the most proficient marksman. The unpredictable 

Gale, Storm or Worse* Hopeless movement of crowds and engaged opponents can easily result in an 

Target is Running Hard ally straying into the line of fire, during the time it takes for a ranged 
weapon to travel the intervening distance to its intended target. 

Target is Sprinting Tormidable 
Thus there is always a risk of accidentally striking someone other 

Target obscured by mist or is in partial 
than the original target being aimed at. 

darkness Hard 
When firing at a specific target at the edge of a crowd or melee, 

Target obscured by thick smoke, fog or is in ] 
Tormidable the attack suffers a difficulty grade of at least Hard. If trying to fire 

through a group to hit a target in its midst, or on the other side, the 
Target is completely obscured Herculean 

penalty should be raised to Formidable. 
Blinded or loss of primary perceptive sense Hopeless 

The result of the dice roll is very important. A marksman who 
Target prone Tormidable passes his attack roll despite the difficulty penalty has aimed true, 
Attacker is prone** Herculean and will hit his intended target. If however the marksman fails the 
Attacker is on unstable ground Hard roll, but would have succeeded if not for the firing into a crowd 

penalty, then an adjacent victim is struck instead. If more than one 
*Assumes the thrown weapon or ammunition is vulnerable to crosswinds; and supersedes the normal 

penalty imposed by winds on physical skills . target 1s in the line of fire, the Games Master should determine the 
victim randomly. 

**Penalty can be negated if using a crossbow from a prepared position. No matter who eventually becomes the target — intended or not 
—if they are aware of the impending attack, they are free to Evade 

DIiSstTaAnNCcEe PEeNnAaLlTtIiEeSs or Parry as normal. Any special effects won as part of the attack only 
The difficulty of hitting a target increases rapidly with the dis- 

apply to the original target, not any accidentally struck bystander. 
tance which separates it from the marksman. Distance is considered 
independent of a weapon’s Range, the latter being the performance FIirRiInNgG oONn tThHEe MOoVvEe 
characteristics of the weapon over set distances. A character is still permitted to use ranged weapons even whilst 

Distance penalties can be offset by the size of the target being mounted on an animal or vehicle. However in these circumstances 
aimed at. Hitting a mammoth at fifty metres is far easier than hit- their combat skill is capped by the Ride or Drive skill of the person 
ting a human at the same range. The table overleaf indicates the controlling the conveyance, which may or may not be the attacker 
difficulty grade adjustment of hitting various sized objects over himself. For example an archer riding in a two man chariot would 
incremental distances. These stack on top of other ranged combat have his attack skill capped by the Drive skill of his driver. 
situational modifiers. Ranged attacks cannot usually be performed if the attacker him- 

These values assume an active target in the open field. If shoot- self is moving at a gait faster than a walk, since their aim is con- 
ing a static object at a known range, for example a straw butt during stantly thrown off by the physical movement. One exception to this 
a competition, the Games Master may reduce the difficulty by a step are warriors trained in a Combat Style specialising in Skirmishing, 
or two. see page 89. However in this case the attacker’s attack percentage 

Whilst there are few creatures which achieve such gargantuan cannot exceed his Athletics skill. 
scales, there are other objects which can reach sizes in the hundreds; 
such as buildings, fortifications, and troop formations. On the battle- ImMPpAaLlIinNgG RAaNnGgEedD ATtTtAaCcKkSs 
field the near impossibility of striking a single man is replaced by the Ranged weapon projectiles which result in an impale, such as 
use of volley fire, saturating an area densely packed with men; in the an arrow or thrown javelin, clearly cannot be yanked free of the 
hope that a small proportion of projectiles will strike home. wound on the next turn by the marksman who threw or fired the 

weapon. However nothing stops a character in close combat with 

DiistTaAnNCcEe PEeNnAaLlTtIiEeSs 

Target SIZ 

10 or less 21-40 81-150 151-300 

1-20m 1 Step Harder No Effect 1 Step Easier 1 Step Easier 2 Steps Easier 2 Steps Easier 

21-40m 1 Step Harder 1 Step Harder No Effect 1 Step Easier 1 Step Easier 2 Steps Easier 

41-60m 2 Steps Harder 1 Step Harder 1 Step Harder No Effect 1 Step Easier 1 Step Easier 

i 61-80m 2 Steps Harder 2 Steps Harder 1 Step Harder 1 Step Harder No Effect 1 Step Easier 

2 81-100m 3 Steps Harder 2 Steps Harder 2 Steps Harder 1 Step Harder 1 Step Harder No Effect 

101-120m 3 Steps Harder 3 Steps Harder 2 Steps Harder 2 Steps Harder 1 Step Harder 1 Step Harder 

121-140m 4 Steps Harder 3 Steps Harder 3 Steps Harder 2 Steps Harder 2 Steps Harder 1 Step Harder 

Each 20m Tollow table progression 

108



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

Throwing weapons, for example javelins, necessitate the weapon 
REeAaLlIiSsTtIicC RAaNnGgEe PEeNnAaLlTtIiEeSs be drawn or plucked up in preparation. This normally only requires 

Trying to lat a man-sized target with a human powered mussile one turn to complete, as per the Ready Weapon action providing it 
weapon is actually much harder than most people expect. A shot must take is within reach. If a second throwing weapon is held in preparation 
inlo consideration physicalf actors such as cross winds, variances between in the off-hand, the caster can swap it over to his throwing hand as 
weight, flexibility and air resistance of each piece of (ostensibly identical) a Iree Action. 
ammunition, and the necessity to arch a shot or throw. Even humidity and 

Projectile weapons, such as slings or bows must be loaded. The 
heat can significantly affect the performance of weapons such as bows. number of turns it takes to load a ranged weapon is listed in its Load 

Further complicating the matter are the difficulty of judging range column on the Ranged Weapons table, page 65. 
accurately, and the diminiskiment in the percewed size of a target as range A character can reduce the time spent loading or readying by use 
increases. And this is assuming a stationary object! Complexity us_further of the Rapid Reload special effect. 
increased when attacking a moving target, because of the time it takes_for 
the weapon to reach the destination; even more so if that target staris to 
move erratically. 

Taking all thesefactors into account, it soon becomes evident that there Hiit LoOCcAaTtIioONnSs 
@5 a huge difference between how ranged weapons are portrayed in_fantasy Most successtul (weapon) attacks land on a specific hit location. 
and the realities of the real world. In actual fact most bow and spear This can be determined randomly or in some circumstances be 
hunters rely primarily on stealth to get very close, and are rarely able to selected by Special Effects such as Choose Location. To randomly 
hat large prey in the wild at ranges over a_few tens of metres. Fortunately calculate which location is been hit, roll 1d20 and compare the 
MrrHRras errs on the side of the heroc. number rolled with the relevant humanoid or creature Hit Location 

table. 
N 4 Animals and monsters usually have slightly different hit location 

tables than humanoids to reflect their own unique physiology. These 
the transfixed victim from subsequently attempting to grab the 

are listed as part of each being’s description in the Creature chap- 
impaling weapon to tear it free. 

ter. The humanoid Hit Location table is repeated here for ease of 
Note that the Size of an impaled weapon is different from the 

reference. 
Force it struck with. Ranged impaling weapons have a special col- 
umn denoting their actual size when considering the hindrances 

HuummAaaNnooOIidD HiiTt LoOCcAaTtIioONnSs 
caused by the Impale special effect. 

1d20 Hit Location 

LoOAaDdIinNgG RAaNnGgEedD WEeAaPpOoNnSs 1-3 Right Leg 

Before a ranged weapon can be used it must either be readied or 46 Left Leg 

loaded. This can often take significant time, slowing down a ranged 79 Abdomen 

combatant’s rate of fire. 10-12 Chest 

13-15 Right Arm 

16-18 Left Arm 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 19-20 Head 

Seeing that Master Zamothis is in trouble, Anathaym abandons the 
impaled halberd, and unwinds her sling from her forehead. At the start of Note than some attacks, especially magical ones or those pro- 

the next round she casts a lead slingshot into the tight melee surrounding her duced by particular monsters (a dragon’s fiery breath for example) 

desperately manoewvring mentor, aiming at a black coated centaur of prodi- may strike several Hit Locations simultaneously. Individual Hit 

glous musculature. Locations may be armoured, either from worn protection or the 

Her combat skill (Meerish Slinger style) is normally 67%. Since she does natural toughness of the creature’s outer surface. This is important 

not wish to accidentally strike Lamothis the roll us considered Hard, reducing when considering Damage and Wound Levels below. 

her skill to 45 %. 
Anathaym passes the attack roll, and selects the Stun Location special DAaMmAaGgEe AanNDd WOoUuNnDd LEeVvEeLlSs 

effect against the unsuspecting creature. Unluckily she rolls minimum damage, If an attack strikes successfully, it causes damage according to 
and her shot glances off its hindquarters with no apparent effect. the damage rating for the weapon (see the statistical entries for close 

Herf urst attack unnoticed, Anathaym reloads, and at the end of the round combat and ranged weapons in the Economics & Equipment chap- 
casts again. This time she does not do so well, rolling 52. Thus not onlyf adls ter, pages 63 to 65). A shortsword, for instance, inflicts 1d6 damage. 
lo strike the black centaur but since it us less than her normal skill (without the 
Jfiring into a crowd penally), it means she has struck a bystander. The Games 
Master states there are two other possible targets in immediate proximaty, a sec- 
ond (chestnut coated) centaur; and Master Jamothis himself A duce is rolled 
lo see whch of the two s struck, and to her horror Anathaym inadvertently 
hits her oblivious mentor. Fortunately thus time the slingshot inflicts no special 
effect, but still manages to draw a glare from the grizzled warrior when the 
shot clangs off lus crested bronze helmet. 

109



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

The rolled damage for the weapon or attack is modified by the 
certain conditions in the specific following order: WOoOuUnNdDIinNgG OPpPpOoNnEeNnTtSs WwIitThH  

aAnN EnNDdUuRrAaNnCcEe oOVvEeRr 100% 
& Apply the Damage Modifier for the character making the When a serious or major wound s inflicted against an opponent that 

attack possesses an Endurance over 100%, the opposed test should take into 
& Modify the damage from any weapon enhancing (or reduc- account the penally applied by the higher skill in the contest. In the rare 

ing) magic cases where Endurance s the hugher skill, it s recommended that the pen- 
& 1If parried, reduce the damage appropriately as per the com- ally us imposed retroactively to attacker’s skill — potentially downgrading 

parative weapon sizes the success level of the original attack roll. 
& I the hit location is armoured, reduce damage by the Armour T s does not mean that the attacker missed his original attack, merely 

Points value that the deadliness of the wound is reduced and it becomes easeer for the 

If the damage inflicted by the attack is above zero, then the hit victim to win the opposed test. 

location sustains that amount of damage, with the damage total - 4 
being immediately removed from the location’s Hit Points. Note 
how many Hit Points the location has remaining, and the wound ongoing penalty of one difficulty grade, until the injury is reduced 

category that results. to a Minor Wound. 

& Minor Wound: Hit Location still has positive Hit Points 
Maajjor WOoUuNnDd 

& Serious Wound: Hit Location is reduced to zero Hit Points 
If a location is reduced to a negative score equal or greater than 

or below 
its starting Hit Points, the character receives a Major Wound. The 

& Major Wound: Hit Location is reduced to a negative score 
character is immediately incapacitated, unable to continue fighting. 

equal or greater than its starting Hit Points 
Alimb is considered to be severed, transfixed, shattered or ripped 

Use the following rules if a location receives a Serious or Major off by a Major Wound. The character drops prone, physically inca- 
wound. Note that wounds requiring Endurance checks test them in pacitated, and must immediately make an opposed test of Endur- 
an opposed roll against the value of the original attack roll. This ance versus the successful attack roll of his enemy. Failure results in 
reflects the ability of highly skilled warriors to make more deadly unconsciousness from the agony. If a severed, punctured or ripped- 
strikes. Endurance rolls are not repeated unless the location is off location is not treated within a number of minutes equal to five 

wounded again. times his Healing Rate, the character dies from blood loss and shock. 
The victim of a Major Wound to the Abdomen, Chest or Head 

MiiInNoOrR WOoUuNnDd drops unconscious, totally incapacitated and must immediately 
make an opposed test of Endurance versus the successful attack 

Minor wounds are cuts, scratches, bruises and sprains. They 
roll of his enemy. Failure results in an instant and gratuitous death 

hurt, may bleed, but are not significant enough to slow down or 
(decapitated, chopped in half, impaled through the heart, torn apart, 

hamper the victim. 
and so forth). If he survives, and the location is not treated within a 
number of Combat Rounds equal to twice his Healing Rate, he still 

SEerRiIoOuUSs WOoUuNnDd dies from blood loss and shock. 
If a location is reduced to zero Hit Points or below, the victim Since most Major Wounds require some form of surgery or 

receives a Serious Wound. The location is permanently scarred, and major magic to heal, the sufferer will be very unlikely to recover 
the victim cannot attack or start to cast spells (but can still parry or from a major wound in time to rejoin combat. Depending on the 
evade) for the next 1d3 turns due to being stunned or distracted by available treatment the wounded location will be potentially maimed 
the pain of the wound. (see Healing from Injury page 80). 
A character suffering a Serious Wound to a limb must immedi- 

ately make an opposed test of his Endurance versus the successful 
HEeRrOoIiCc LAaSsTt ACcTtIioONnSs 

attack roll of his enemy. Failure results in the limb being rendered 
In special cases where key characters receive a Major Wound, 

useless, until the location is restored to positive hit points. If a leg, 
the Games Master might allow a heroic last action - such as spitting 

the victim drops prone. If an arm, he drops whatever he is holding 
out one last spell, attempting to cut down their slayer, crawling away 

unless the object is strapped on (use common sense here). 
to hide, or trying to tourniquet their own wound. They must have 

A character suffering a Serious Wound to the Abdomen, Chest 
working limbs applicable to the action, and burn a Luck Point. They 

or Head must immediately make an opposed test of his Endur- 
get a single opportunity to attempt their action, and then immedi- 

ance versus the successful attack roll of his enemy. Failure results in 
ately collapse into unconsciousness, and probable death. 

unconsciousness for a number of minutes equal to the amount of 
damage sustained in the attack causing the Serious Wound. First Aid 
or Healing skills can be used to help an unconscious victim regain 
consciousness, but he will not be able to rejoin any combat until he 
has received further healing to the Seriously Wounded location. 

At the Games Master’s discression, even if the character remains 

functional, all tasks requiring use of that body location will suffer an 

110



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  COoMmBbAaTt 

— eager yet incompetent. In terms of conflict, members of a rabble 
ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 

Guving up on her sling, Anathaym recovers her shortsword and rushes use the following guidelines: 

o ad Master Zamothis, who despite cutting down two of the formidable & Rabble have little or no armour 
centaurs s becoming rapidly exhausted. Just as she arrives, the big black 

& Rabble are too incompetent to be able to use Special Effects 
centaur smashes through the last of her mentor’s shueld, and with s return & Rabble have Hit Points equal to one fifth (rounded up) of the 
blow catches Zamothis full in the head. Despite the protection of his helmet CON+SIZ of an average member of that race 
the aging warrior is knocked down, out of thefight with a Major Wound. & Once they receive any damage, they cease fighting 

Anathaym screams with_fury and leaps astride the centaur’s back, taking & If the damage is less than their Hit Points they flee cursing or 
it completely by surprise. On her next turn she stabs with her shortsword. The yelling in fear 
gods are with her and she rolls a critical success. Since the centaur was unable & If the damage equals or surpasses their Hit Points, they 
lo defend with its club, she gains two special effects and chooses Maximise 

collapse clutching the wounded location, and weeping or 
Damage and Impale, driving her blade deep into its back. Although this might screaming in agony 
havef inished off a human, the centaur is somewhat tougher. On its own turn & If the damage is double their Hit Points, they dic in a spectac- 
it rears, throwing her off: Anathaym_fails her Athletics roll and lands prone — ular and grotesque manner 
unarmed and helpless before the enraged creature. & Once one third of their number are dead or wounded, the 

As it raises ats great club to_finish her off; theforgotten Master Zamothis rest of the rabble break and take flight 
spends a Luck Point to perform a Herow Last Action and rallies long enough 
lo cast s knife at the centawr. 1tf lies true, striking the beast in the chest, near 
to where the tip of Anathaym’s shortsword emerges. Thus us enough to give the UNnDdEeRrLlIinNGgSs 
centaur a Serwous Wound, forcing it to make an opposed roll of its Endurance 

Underlings are competent foes usually sent en-masse to harass 
against the attack 1oll of the thrown knife. Jamothis wins with the higher roll, 

Adventurers: thuggish bodyguards irregular troops in the opening 
and. the centaur chuef collapses with a look of surprise. 

stages of a battle, for example. Despite not being tracked as full char- 
The remaining centaurs take this as an omen, and lacking the steadying 

acters, underlings can prove deadly if they catch their targets unpre- 
presence of their sorceren; turn tail andf lee. Anathaym crawls over to the now 

pared. Similar to rabble, Underlings use the following guidelines: 
unconscious body of her beloved mentor and performs First Aud on his cracked 
skull, saving his life. Then with the help of the rescued youth, they carry the & Underlings wear moderate amounts of armour 
old man back to Meeros. & Underlings are freely able to use Special Effects 

& Underlings have Hit Points equal to one fifth of the CON+- 
SIZ of an average member of that race 

OPpTtIioONnAaLl RUuLlEeSs:: & Once they receive two injuries, they cease fighting and if’ pos- 
sible, withdraw cursing or yelling in fear 

RAaBbBbLlEe & UNnDdEeRrLlIinNGgSs & If the damage equals or surpasses their Hit Points, they auto- 
matically fail the Endurance roll, suffering the effects of a 

Only use these optional rules when the characters are_facing a ravening horde of Serious Wound in the location struck 

inconsequential and expendable adversaries. Competent NPCs and major villains & If the damage is double their Hit Points, they die in a grue- 

should be treated differently somely violent manner 
& Once half their number are dead or wounded, the rest of the 

underlings withdraw from the fight 
A mainstay of some fantasy literature is the scene of heroes 

scything down hordes of faceless opponents, be they enemy soldiers, 
fanatical cultists or even ravening demi-humans. To portray such 
battles in MYTHRAS can not only be time consuming enterprises, but 
are also difficult to pull off satisfactorily considering the ever pres- 
ent risk of becoming outnumbered or rolling a fumble at the wrong 
time. Luck Points can only help so far. 
A better way of modelling these types of encounter is to provide 

weaker foes or simplify the book keeping required to keep track of 
injuries. MYTHRAS offers alternate options to dealing with this issue, 
thus speeding up combat considerably. 

RAaBbBbLlEe 
Rabble are foes who intimidate by their numbers but in actual 

fact have little prowess or willingness to remain in combat once 
blood is shed. They can take many forms from vicious beggars who 
set upon drunken characters when they stumble home from the tav- 
ern along dark alleyways; or the mindless adherents of a dark cult 

111



Mythras:  Magic

% Mo e!  m KW S s A 7 = 17 %X N 

Magic

| TR Mok oo F m KW K I K EA P XN 

agic comes in many forms and derives from numerous 
sources, but all forms of magic have one thing in com- MAaGgIiCcAaLl DIiSsCcIiPpLlIinNEeSs 

M mon: the ability for the user to overcome or manipu- MyTtHRAS provides rules for five distinct magical types, which 
late the natural order of the world to achieve specific, supernatural for case of reference are called disciplines. Others exist, and will 
effects. The theist’s magic derives from the relationship with his god; no doubt be explored in future supplements. Each of the following 
the sorcerer’s magic derives from the rituals and formulae he has magical disciplines receives its own chapter describing in detail how 
mastered; the animist’s magic comes from his relationship with the that magic works, how characters come by it, and what spells, spirits 
spirits; and the mystic’s magic comes from within himself. Despite or other abilities are available. 
their sources and the relationships that drive them, all these magi- Although each discipline provides a unique and interesting style 
cians are able to perform remarkable feats that are beyond the capa- of magic, a MYTHRAS campaign does not have to include all five. 
bilities of non-practitioners. Games Masters should consider whether each discipline is suitable 

for his game setting. A campaign based on an archipelago of tropical 
islands might only include Animism; whereas a more inclusive game 
world might be based upon opposing cultures, one dominated by 

TAaIilLoOrRIinNgG MAaGgIiCc sorcerers, and the other theist priests, but both of which also practice 
Magic is one of the most variable aspects of any roleplaying mysticism in addition. 

game. Whilst elements such as how character generation or combat Note that every discipline of magic has its own strengths and 
works are ubiquitous no matter what the setting, almost every histor- weaknesses and are not necessarily balanced with one another. The 
ical and fantasy genre has its own idiosyncratic style of magic — how five core disciplines are: 
it is prepared, cast, and the scale of effect it can produce. 

To ensure flexible adaptability, magic in MYTHRAS has been given 
a range of options so that it can support a wide array of settings FoLlk MAaGgIiCc 
and styles. The following sections describe different alternatives with Tolk Magic is the most basic form of magic available, and is 

which magic can be tweaked. These suggestions are intended to usually associated with hedge wizards, witches, wise women, and so 

inspire Games Masters to create unique magical ecologies, helping forth. These are simple spells and cantrips that offer limited magical 

to overcome issues where a default system may appear at odds with effects and can, where permissible, be used by anyone. Folk Magic is 

the setting concept the Games Master wishes to model. frequently taught by communities from an early age with the types 

Although at first glance the range of options may seem some- of spells reflecting community necessities. This means that the Folk 

what overwhelming, there are in fact only a few core considerations Magic taught by a Barbarian culture will differ to that taught by 

required: a Civilised one. Folk Magic is also taught by some professions or 
cults to aid their members in their jobs and duties. Folk Magic can 

& What magical disciplines are available? therefore be accessible and available to all — in theory. In practice, 
& What magical traditions control magic? Tolk Magic might be heavily restricted depending on the campaign 
& How many magical abilities do traditions provide? setting, 
& How long does magic take to cast? 
& How is magical energy generated and recovered? 

ANnIiMmIisSmM 
& Can characters start with magic? 

A higher magical discipline, Animism is the practice of dealing 
with the spirit world and spirits that are bound to the mortal realm 

112

L 
X 

i 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

in some form. Animists are shamans and totemists who deliberately 
develop relationships with spirits to work magical effects, usually on 
behalf of a community but also for obtaining personal power. Ani- 
mists believe that all things, be they animate or inanimate, organic 
or non-organic, are possessed of a spirit or soul. A relationship with 
that spirit allows its power to be drawn upon and used by the ani- 
mist. Animism usually teaches a profound respect for the natural 
and spirit worlds, inculcating in its practitioners a need for restraint 
and reciprocation. This does not mean, though, that there are no 
rogue shamans; even animism has its share of selfish individuals pre- 
pared to ignore this respect in favour of gaining greater personal 
power at the expense of the spirit world. 

MYysTtIicCiIsSmM 
Mysticism achieves its effects through a combination of deep 

inner understanding of the fabric of reality, and channelling energy 
to produce a resulting action. The mystic attains this state of under- 
standing through constant contemplation of the world around him, 
discerning its truths and meditating on the very nature of existence. 
This process is quite often linked with the asking of philosophically 
challenging questions, but it is more common for the mystic simply 
to understand both his place in the universe, and how the universe 
itself is placed. This comprehension forms a path to unlock the mys- 
tic’s inner potential. Mystics, ultimately, seek to transcend the fetters 
of the natural world, and achieve a higher state of consciousness 
that places them directly at one with the forces of the cosmos. The 
reality though is far more complex, because every accomplished 
mystic knows that an even higher state of existence can be attained, 
one that transcends even the powers of the gods. 

SoORrCcEeRrYy 
Sorcery is the manipulation of underlying laws that directly upon is always based on the nature of the god or pantheon being 

control the very fabric of creation. These formulae are complex worshipped. The strength of devotion to a god has a direct impact 
equations: a mixture of mathematical, psychological, existential, on the power of the magic worked; assuming that the deity retains 
and supernatural principals that allow the sorcerer to grasp a por- some awareness of his worshippers, maintaining a cordial relation- 
tion of reality and bend it to his will. Sorcerers do not need to rely ship with the god is necessary to receive its power. 
on gods for their powers; nor do they need to engage with spirits 
to achieve their effects. Their manipulation of these metaphysical 
equations makes sorcery very powerful and very flexible. However, 
it also means sorcerers are viewed with suspicion, and even fear and MAaGgIiCcAaLl TRrAaDdIiTtIioOnNSs 
hatred by those who come by their magic through less direct means. Although people may be born with the capacity to work magic 

And, because sorcerers have little need for gods or spirits, it is not to greater or lesser degrees, the actual skill of using it is normally 
uncommon for them to develop a certain degree of arrogance and taught and cultivated via some kind of social organisation; such as a 
disdain for those who choose to venerate such entities. Although cult, order or a mentor. These are known collectively as traditions. 
some sorcerers maintain a healthy respect for the gods, and may For example, the Cult of Myceras and the Cult of the Seven Badoshi 
even practice worship themselves, this does not lessen the fact that Devils are both traditions based upon religious organisations, but 
the sorcerer is, through his magic, attempting to perform acts that worship different gods and teach their priesthoods different miracles. 
others may consider as the province of greater beings. Some traditions are not limited to providing a single discipline 

of magic, but can combine two or more. A sorcery order could offer 

THhEeIisSmM both Folk Magic and Sorcery to its members; the former providing 
petty cantrips to lower ranking apprentices, whilst adepts and above 

Theists draw their magic from their gods. Through worship and 
are taught more potent spells of the higher art. 

devotion, those that dedicate themselves to a deity channel these 
It should also be noted that membership of a tradition need not 

powers in the form of miracles, and thus gain the ability to work 
necessarily grant access to magic. One could be a faithful worship- 

similar effects in the mundane world — albeit in a much diluted form. 
per of Myceras, and hold the rank of lay member in his cult, yet still 

A worshipper of the Storm God might be able to summon lightning; 
have no ability to cast theistic magic. 

a worshipper of the sun god might be able to create brilliant daylight 
even in the midst of the blackest night. The magic theists can call 

113



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

As part of setting up the magical traditions in a campaign Games member of the warrior caste may be restricted to only learning 
Masters should give some thought to what type of organisation or mysticism. 
social groups will provide it. Some examples follow. 

SPpEeCcIiEeSs SPpEeCcIiFfIicC 
Cuutlrts Some races or species are naturally predisposed to magical 

Organised sects who venerate a religion, a philosophy or an indi- knowledge. Elves or satyrs, for instance, are associated with consid- 
vidual, cults receive a great deal more attention in their own chap- erable magical powers. Within the species magical skills are natural 
ter. By and large cults only teach magic to their members, and are capabilities that only need training and refinement. Depending on 
likely to restrict certain types or magic and spells to those who attain what type of magic they were inherently gifted with, the relevant 
higher ranks within the cult. Cults can teach any kind of magic, magical skills could be considered Standard for that species. Typi- 
depending on their nature. Some may mix magical styles (theism cally species specific magic tends to be of one type: Folk, Animism 
and animism, say) whilst others may have only one, and so on. or Theism the most common. Magic such as sorcery and mysticism 

may be learned but is generally not a natural accoutrement. 

GuuIiLlDdSs 
Guilds are professional bodies that represent and guard mem- ToTtEemMSs 

bers of that occupation. Because they are focused on protecting Many cultures adopt totems or other symbols that become a 
their market, and because they are concerned with more mundane focus and provider of magical power. The most prevalent exam- 
skills, guilds are unlikely to offer higher magic, focusing instead on ples are those practicing animism, but there is no reason why totems 
Tolk Magic — and only those spells of direct use and relevance to the should be confined solely to spirit magic. Sorcery orders may gain 
profession. their knowledge through totemic practices; and idolatry in theistic 

worship is very similar. Rather than an organised cult of teachers, it 

RoYyAaLlTtYy AanNDd NOoBbLlEe HOoUuSsEeSs is the totem itself which is the channel for magical knowledge and 
skill, granting magical lore to those that establish suitable bonds with 

Kings, queens and emperors might attain royal power through 
it or are born into the correct family, tribe or race to understand its 

their command of magic, or through the support of those who wield 
lore. 

it. In some settings a monarch might be truly a divine appointment, 
the living representative of a deity in the world. Conversely the 
power to work magic might be dependent on inheriting the cor- 
rect noble bloodline. Magic can be of any type, although in most How MAaNnYy ABbILilIiTtIiEeSs? 
works of fantasy, magic-wielding monarchs tend to be either theists Abilities are the spells, talents, miracles or spirits provided by 
or sorcerers. Outside the royal sphere magic use may be outlawed: it magical traditions. The number of abilities a tradition offers is com- 
could be a threat to the monarchy, and thus needs to be suppressed. pletely setting-specific. A world in which cult theocracies rule entire 
More benevolent monarchs might use magic for the greater good, nations may offer more miracles to its priesthood than a setting 
but where magic keeps the monarchy in power, it is usual for all where grimoires of sorcery are exceptionally rare, each containing 
sources of power to be jealously guarded. but a single spell. Several elements can adjust the amount and pro- 

clivity of abilities available to a tradition. 

InNdDIivViIdDuUaALl TEeaACcHhEeRrSs Firstly, traditions normally structure the learning path of the 

The wandering hedge magician, hermit-mage, old and wise magical abilities they provide. Members only gain access to more 

counsellor... fantasy is awash with examples of learned individuals potent magics at higher levels of achievement and rank. For exam- 

who find and mentor an apprentice in the magical arts. Such prac- ple; if a sorcery order knows the particularly deadly spell Wrack, it 

titioners are usually specialists in one form of magic, and may even is highly unlikely that it will be taught to students until they have 

be an established part of a community, training the young adults attained a certain degree of knowledge, maturity and seniority to be 

in those magical powers they will need to continue contributing to entrusted with its power and secrets. 

society, or making their way in the world. Primitive and nomadic Secondly, traditions may teach more than one type of magic. A 

cultures often rely on this form of patronage, lacking the popula- cult might combine Folk Magic with Theism for instance, granting a 

tion numbers and organisation to support more formalised magical broader range of abilities. In this case the Games Master can grant a 

tutoring. similar number of abilities per discipline, or limit the number given 
to the more powerful one. 

SocciiaALl CAaSsTtEeSs 
Similar to magic restricted to nobility, social castes can denote 

SPpEeLlLlSs bByY ORrGgAaNnIiSsAaTtIioOnN 
what type of magic is available or taught to a person depending on 

Medium 
the birth caste they belong to. Settings with magic limited by social 

Low Magic Magic Magic Rich 
caste should probably offer a range of different types according to 

Number of spells, 
birth rank, hereditary lineage or something similar. Someone of the 

spirits, miracles, 
priestly caste might automatically join the predominant religion and 

talents etc an 1d3 1d3+3 1d3+6 
be indoctrinated into Theism for example; whereas a lower born 

organisation 

possesses: 

114



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

A Games Master should consider how versatile he wishes magic THhEe GAaMmEeSs MAaSTstEeRr'’Ss SaAgGaA 
to be in his setting and adjust the number and availability of abilities Steve designs his campaign to make use of all the avarlable magical disci- 
to suit. But, as a rule of thumb, use the Spells by Organisation table Dlines, assigning them on the basis of culture and species: 
as a guide: 

In selecting what magical abilities are available, balance is key. &K Folk Magic is known to all cultures and sapient species 

Just because a spell, miracle, talent or spirit is listed in MYTHRAS &K Animism is practiced by the wild tribes of bestial centaurs, satyrs and 

does not mean that everyone should have access to it. Create spell minotaurs 

lists; choose wisely. Don’t feel compelled to use every ability found &K Mysticism is studied by the remote nomad clans of the high plateau desert 

in these rules. Indeed, some of the magics found in MYTHRAS can &K Sorcery is ostensibly forbidden in all cultures and is rare beyond isolated 

be exceptionally powerful. If Games Masters feel these would desta- individuals 

bilise his game then they should be either be omitted completely, K Theism is_favoured by both the civilised city states (of which Meeros is 

withheld or reserved for potent non-player characters. central), and the barbarian hordes of the Badoshi Warlords. 

Thus it is probably unwise to allow players to devise their own 
traditions and spell lists — at least not without Games Master guid- 
ance and approval. MAaGgIiCcAaLl ENnEeRrGgYy 

Although knowledge of magical powers may be prevalent in 
a setting, it does not automatically follow that the magical energy 

RIiTtUuAaLlIiSsTtIicC required to invoke them is as widespread, or even available. Having 
 

the skill to transform a man into a leopard is useless if you don’t have 

CAaSsTtIinNgG TIimMEeSs the energy to cast the spell or request the miracle from the gods. 
Whilst every character has an attribute known as Magic Points, 

By default each type of magic in MYTHRAS has a casting time of 
derived from their characteristic POW, this merely represents the 

mere seconds. Whilst this permits magicians to utilise their powers 
capacity to hold or store magical energy, not necessarily the ability 

more freely, especially in combat situations, it can pose some prob- 
to generate their own. 

lems when trying to replicate the feeling of extreme effort it often 
Of all the considerations required to tailor MYTHRAS magic to 

takes for magic to be cast in some genres. 
a campaign setting, where magical energy comes from (and how to 

There are several methods of handling this issue: 
recover it) is perhaps the most important. 

& Grant casters the ability to roll an Easy skill check if spending 
one minute in preparation, or Very Easy if spending an hour, WHhEeRrEe Do MAaGgIiCc 
but only for the purposes of casting the spell (and any subse- 
quent resistance checks) Poiints COoMmEe FrRoOmM?? 

& Increase the default base casting time from Turns to Rounds, Magical energy should come from a particular source as defined 
Minutes, Hours or even Days instead by the campaign setting. The following options need not be generic; 

& As above, but in duress allow a magician to speed up cast- for example some types of magic might require particular sources 
ing at a skill penalty of one difficulty grade per time frame different from each other. Also the setting might permit a few 
advanced sources to be used in combination, so that there are several methods 

of gathering Magic Points. 
Of course ritualistic casting times need not be universally applied 

to all magical disciplines, which can grant one type of magic a sig- & Self: the simplest and most convenient source of Magic 
nificant speed advantage over others. For example Sorcery and Points, characters generate their own magical energy 
Animism could have their base casting time increased to minutes, & Sacrifice: magical energy is ‘harvested’ from the sacrifice of 
whilst Mysticism remains unmodified. This will have a significant on living creatures 
a campaign setting, but can create some rather unusual, yet enter- & Magical Locations: magic is naturally produced at foci such 
taining, twists in how magic is utilised. as ley-lines, temples, and the like 

In general, increasing the length of casting times will turn magic & Destruction of an inanimate object: magic may come from 
into a more thoughtfully applied tool — rather than a method of a ethereal or mineral substance of limited supply, gems for 
applying greater firepower — and encourages careful planning. It can example 
generate a huge amount of atmosphere, especially if the magician & Consumption of a substance: the consumption of particu- 
must augment this preparation time with the inscription of magical lar herbs, narcotics or animal products may provide magical 
sigils, tossing of powders, use of ritualised objects or even singing energy 
and dancing. & Veneration: in a similar manner to the worship of gods, 

Games Masters should take care when applying ritualistic cast- magic points might be provided to individuals who tap into, 
ing times. Although it can add ambience to a setting, players with or become the focus of, organised worship 
magic-using characters may feel hampered by increased preparation 
times, and some magical abilities may lose a degree of applicability Characters must have access to the source of their magical 

if they cannot be cast near instantaneously. energy to be able to regain expended Magic Points. If they do not, 
then points used in the process of casting spells or using magical 
abilities cannot be regained until the source is obtained. 

115



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

SEeLlFf travel about with a string of such animals in tow, which will require 

Here, the character attracts and stores magical energy from the care, feeding, guarding, and so on. 

world around him. Recovering Magic Points is simply a matter of Note that those magicians seeking sapient victims for sacrifice 

resting, and letting his body absorb the natural magical emanations had better belong to a culture which supports such activities. Need- 

of the world until his points are restored. He need do nothing else. less killing of prisoners or slaves for the purposes of invoking magic 

This has been considered the default source of Magic Points in other has dark connotations, especially when that magic is used for per- 

games, but Games Masters should not feel limited by it. sonal gain rather than being intended for the care and protection of 
the community. 

SAaCcRrIiFfIicCeE 
Sacrifice is a common trope of both the Sword & Sorcery genre MAaGgIiCcAaLl LoOCcAaTtIioONnSs 

and historical religious practices. It requires the ritualised death of Here, a geographical place or physical structure acts as a con- 

a ‘victim’ to produce a number of Magic Points, which can then be duit for natural magical energy which individuals can then absorb, 

sent to an otherworld entity such as a god, spirit or demon in order replenishing diminished resources. The individual must spend a 

to propitiate them; or the magical energy can be absorbed by the given period of time at this location, resting, praying, meditating, 

person performing the sacrifice. and so on, for Magic Points to accrue. How much magic depends on 

The amount of magical energy produced by such an act is an the strength of the place, and its environment. Some locations may 

important consideration. Traditionally the most minimal sacrifices only provide Magic Points to particular types of magical disciplines 

are livestock animals, whilst the most potent are sapient beings. With — ¢.g. druid groves might only produce Magic Points for Animists. 

that in mind, MYTHRAS assumes as a default that the amount of Give a location a Magical Strength of either 25%, 50%, 75% or 

Magic Points harvested by a being’s death is equal to their POW. 100%, depending on its size and importance. The Magical Strength 

This can be raised or lowered as deemed fitting for the setting. is the percentage of a character’s Magic Points that can be regained. 

Although at face value this may appear to provide a boundless Tor example, a character with a normal stock of 16 Magic Points 

source of Magic Points, there are several important limitations to spending time at a shrine with Magical Strength of 25% would only 

keep in mind. Firstly very few cultures or societies have ‘excess’ be able to recover back to a level of four Magic Points; whereas 

livestock available for the purposes of ritual offerings.This is why attending a major temple with Magical Strength 100% would allow 

it is called a sacrifice; because it may cost the community dearly him to restore his full 16 Magic Points. 

to provide an animal from their subsistence level herds or flocks. The amount of time taken to replenish Magic Points should 

In places where animals are freely available for purchase, then the depend on the overall strength of magic in the campaign. See 

requirement becomes a question of finances, as a horse or cow is not Recovering Magic Points below for guidance. 

a cheap commodity. 
DEeSsTtRrUuCcTtIioOnN aAnNdD COoNnSsUuMmPpTtIioONn 

Secondly each cult is likely to have a specific type of creature it 
These work in similar ways to Magical Locations. The thing 

requires as the preferred sacrificial victim, meaning that killing the 
destroyed or consumed should be given a Magical Strength of 25%, 

wrong beast may net the character no Magic Points at all. Even if 
50%, 75% or 100%, depending on its quality, purity and other cru- 

the correct species of creature is located, it may be required to be 
cial factors. When destroyed or imbibed, Magic Points are recharged 

in perfect health, possess an unblemished skin, be of a particular 
back up to the level indicated by the percentage, at the rates sug- 

colour, and so on. Once these factors are taken into consideration, 
gested in the Recovering Magic Points section.. 

it is doubtful that adventuring priests, sorcerers or shamans would 

HE AMES ASTER'S AGA VEeNnEeRrAaTtIioOnN 
The Games Master’s Saga

Characters who orchestrate the ceremonial worship of super- 
Further detailing bs campaign world, Steve develops the traditions which 

natural beings are able to tap into magical energy produced by the 
will teach and control magic. He constrains the practice of each discipline 

worshippers. Others, who attain the status of heroes and demigods, 
thusly: 

may even use the veneration of themselves as a source of Magic 
Folk Magic s taught as both an adjunct to religious cults and via individ- 

Points. The amount of Magical Strength provided by each ritualised 
ual teachers, such as hedge wizards or witches. 

ceremony is dependent on the number of people who offer venera- 
Animism can only be learned by those beast races which still possess an 

tion, as follows: 
amimal affinity to a particular totem spirit. Thus centaurs venerate Great 
Horse, their species totem, with whom only they can_form a bond. Knowledge 

Less than 100: 25% 
us tightly held by clan shamans. 

100-999: 50% 
Mysticism 15 only taught to magically eligible nomads of the correct birth 

1000-9,999: 75% 
caste; thewr path of mysticism dependent on which astrological conjunction is 

10,000 or more: 100% 
at the apex of the sky as the chuld emenrgesfrom uts mother. 

Sorcery, forbudden due to its diabolic overtones, s secretly studied by lone 
practitioners who stumble upon the art, or under the tutelage of recluswe sor- REeCcOoVvEeRrIinNgG MAaGgIiCc POoIiNnTtSs 
cerers living in remote places. How quickly Magic Points return is vital to the feel of a cam- 

Theism s jealously guarded by the innumerable culls which propitiate the paign. Rapid return allows potent powers to be thrown about with 
gods. Each of the cily states has its own unique patron deity, the temple to impunity, whereas slow recovery makes each act of magic an import- 
which acts as the cult centrefor that god. The Badosh: on the other hand have ant decision and rare occurrence. 
a pantheon of seven demons which is universally worshipped by all the tribes. 

116



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

The same principle applies to settings where several different 
How mMAaNnYy MAaGgIiCc POoIiNnTtSs forms of magical power generation exist in parallel. A character 

fFoORr SAaCcRrIiFfIicCiInNgG Aa..... who recuperates at a dolman, performs a sacrifice, and is venerated 
Sacrificial Magic Points are a perfect way to represent the transference by his army of worshippers may only recover as many Magic Points 

or generation of magical power in many hustorical or gritty Sword & as provided by the most productive of those three sources. 

Sorcery settings. Using this method however, will prompt the frequently Of course, games in which magicians recover Magic Points nat- 
urally should ignore this rule, at least where it applies to the number 

asked question of “How much magic is this creature worth?’ 
of Magic Points generated from self. 

As a general rule of thumb, Games Masters should treat tiny animals, 

especially those which can be raised en-mass (such as doves) as capable of 
RUuNnNnIinNGg Out oFf MAaGgIiCc POoIiNnTtSs 

only producing a single Magic Point. Small animals (snakes, cals etc) as 
The consequences of running out of Magic Points are, again, a 

only generate 1d3 Magic Points, medium sized creatures (goats, pugs, and 
campaign decision, and should be dependent on the setting. MyTH- 

50 on) produce 1d6 Magic Points, and large animals (cows, bulls, horses) RAS’s default position is that, when Magic Points reach zero, no more 
2d6 Magic Points. Only truly huge, magical or sapient creatures should spells or magical abilities can be used, but there are no further con- 
provide 3d6 MPs or more. sequences for the character. 

N 4 Additional options are offered below: 

Only some sources of Magic Points permit natural recovery: FaAtTiIgGuUEe ACcCcRrUuAaLl 

Self, Locations and Veneration. These assume complete rest, com- Characters can continue to cast magic or use magical abilities, 

fort, and freedom from threat or stress. Camping in an occupied but gain one level of Fatigue for each Magic Point expended in the 

dungeon or resting in the wilderness during the depths of winter spell or ability attempted. Note that in certain circumstances this 

would prevent recovery; whereas returning to somewhere safe and could kill the caster if a fumble is rolled. 

sheltered like an inn would permit it. 
HIiTt POoIinNTt ATtTtRrIitTiIoOnN 

&1 Magic Point per hour — Good for Magic Rich campaigns As for Fatigue Accrual but, instead, the caster suffers 1 Hit Point 
& 1 Magic Point per day — Good for Medium Magic campaigns of physical damage to all Hit Locations for each spell or ability 
& 1 Magic Point per week — Good for Low Magic campaigns attempted, no matter what its potency, magnitude or intensity. The 
& Magic Points return at particular conjunctions — This option magician can keep on casting spells until he has incurred the equiv- 

is perfect for settings with strong celestial or religious over- alent of a Major Wound, but at this point he is risking imminent 
tones, the Magic Points of a source only being available at death. Natural healing processes are needed to restore expended Hit 
specific times, such as those tapped from Veneration occur- Points; they do not regenerate with Magic Points. 
ring on holy days sacred to that god, or magic from a mega- 
lithic stone circle flowing when the moon is full. UNnCcOoNnSCscIiOoUuSsNnEeSsSs 

On reaching zero Magic Points the character automatically falls 
Whilst Medium or Low Magic recovery rates appear to be crip- comatose and remains that way until at least 1 Magic Point has been 

pling for player character magicians, they do emphasise the rarity regained. Depending on the source of Magic Points, this might 
of magic in some genres. On the other hand they offer a balanced mean extended periods in a coma, or even eventual death if not 
game when characters have access to some of the most potent spells. cared for in the interim. 

In fact the slow Magic Point recovery of a Low Magic campaign 
is perfect for campaigns involving antagonists armed with deadly WIiLlLlpPoOwWEeRr 
magic, allowing characters to survive the wrathful persecution of On reaching zero Magic Points the magician must make a suc- 
say, a sorcerer, if after casting a couple of powerful spells he has to cessful Willpower roll to remain conscious. He is not prevented from 
recover for several months before trying his diabolical magic again. trying to cast a new spell, but each subsequent attempt requires a 

Magic Points from other sources can be recovered by performing new Willpower roll, at an additional difficultly penalty. Thus the 
a ritual sacrifice, formal destruction of certain objects or the relaxed second check is Hard, the third Formidable, and so on. If the magi- 
imbibing of other substances. Those acts in themselves should cian fails they collapse into unconsciousness for a random number 
require at least an hour of effort, unless the magician wishes to has- of days up to the number of Willpower checks taken (so failing the 
ten the experience and risk the loss of the magical energy generated. third check would be 1d3 days of unconsciousness). 

HE ULE OF ECOVERY Endurance or Die
The Rule of Recovery NDURANCE OR iE 

Reaching zero Magic Points represents the exhaustion of life- 
As a general guideline, it is suggested that characters cannot 

force. The magician must make a successful Endurance roll or die, 
recover more Magic Points than what is naturally produced by the 

his psychic reserves having being spent completely. If the magician 
local environment or their last ‘recharge’. Thus a character who 

rolls a critical success he regains 1 Magic Point immediately. 
rests in a magical location which can produce 50% of his magical 
strength, cannot visit several of these places in succession in order 

These options can, of course, be mixed and matched if Games 
to completely regenerate his Magic Points. Neither can a magician 

Masters desire, creating any number of custom variants that lend 
sacrifice several goats in sequence and add each offering together to 

a unique feel and character to how magic manifests itself in the 
fully top up. 

campaign. 

117



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

Masters may wish to limit the availability of certain abilities accord- 
CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs & MAaGgIiCc ing to cult rank, ensuring that characters learn the secrets of their 

MyTHRAS does not automatically assume that everyone can use path in a particular order, and withholding the most potent abilities 
magic or, even if they can, have access to it. Magic is not a right and until the cult deems them responsible enough to be trusted with such 
nor should it be. Achieving any skill in magic usually requires follow- knowledge. 
ing a career that teaches it as a specific discipline. This is certainly The values provided in the table are merely suggestions. These 
very true of the higher magical paths such as Animism and Sorcery. can be changed if necessary, dependent on the flow of Experience 
It may be possible for characters to have a smattering of Folk Magic Rolls permitted. Since they are important advancements both to 
spells if this fits with the setting and level of magic within it. Gen- personal power and progression within a tradition, their costs should 
erally magic should be something to be marvelled at, respected and be a significant investment. However, a character can break down 
feared. the total investment of time and Experience Rolls into instalments 

over several sessions of play. 

BEeCccoOmMIinNgG Aa MAaGgIiCcIiaAnN At some point magician characters are likely to have learned all 
the abilities provided by their cult, school or path. Depending upon 

Unless magic is ubiquitous within a campaign, not all characters 
the game world, this need not be the end of their magical develop- 

begin with the knowledge or capability to perform magic. As can 
ment. A character might be able to join a new cult, find another 

be seen in the Careers and Development chapter, the specific skills 
cache of sequestered knowledge or even seek tuition by a more 

required to learn magic are by default restricted to certain profes- 
renowned master. Such efforts require the starting of another skill 

sions. Of course that need not be the case in all settings, but it works 
specific to the philosophy of the new tradition. 

as a general guideline. 
There are a number of deliberations a Game Master must work 

out prior to allowing magic using characters to be created. ExPpeeErRieIEnNcCeE ROoLlLl AanNDd TIimMEe COoSsTtSs 

Magic Type Experience 
1Is the ability to use magic restricted to a particular inborn gift? If so: Rolls 

& Does the gift need to be nurtured during childhood to bring it Tolk Magic Cantrip/Charm 3 1 Week 

to fruition, or can it be trained at any time of life? Animism Spirit ) 1 Month 

& How extraordinary is the gift, is it commonplace or ultra rare? Mysticism Talent 5 1 Month 

& Does possession of the gift grant instant access to particular Sorcery Spell 5 1 Month 

cults or brotherhoods? Theism Miracle 5 1 Month 

& Are those that bear the gift persecuted if they do not engage 
in formal training? 

& If formal training is unavailable, can magicians teach LeEaArRnNIinNgG NEewW TRrAaDdIiTtIioOnNSs 
themselves? 

Nothing prevents a character from joining a new tradition, pro- 

1f magic is available to anyone provided they have the knowledge then: vided that: 

& Do cults, brotherhoods, and so on restrict access to it to pre- & The new tradition uses the same maggi1c al discippllinnee,,  for exam- 

serve their own power base? ple a theist cult can only join other theistic traditions 

& Ts membership of such an organisation restricted to a certain & There is no antippaatthhy y between the new tradition and anyy  oth- 

social class, career, culture, and so on? ers the character may already be a member of 

& How far is magic taught by the culture the character belongs & The Games Master is willing g too  p permit the character to Jj oin 

to? a new tradition 

This assumes that magic cannot simply be learned by anyone 
who decides to start studying it. In this case there may be no restric- 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MAaGgIiCc tion to joining traditions which teach new styles of magic, save for 
Characters permitted to learn magic start with knowing a num- the usual conflicts of interest. Games Masters should beware of 

ber of abilities (spells, miracles, spirits or talents) based upon the characters learning multiple magical disciplines if this does not suit 
value of the appropriate magical skill in that tradition (Binding, their campaign setting. 
Devotion, Folk Magic, Invocation or Mysticism). Once the game In general it takes six months of dedicated study and the per- 
begins they are restricted in what additional abilities they can learn, mission of its highest ranking masters, to gain the new tradition at 
and when they can learn them. its base percentage, and whatever initial spells or talents the student 

At character generation, a magician character knows one rel- is capable of learning. This costs the same amount of Experience 
evant spell or ability for each 20% (or part thereof) he has in his Rolls as would normally be required to learn whatever new Pro- 
magical skill. fessional skills are necessary for that tradition, plus the cost of each 

spell learned. 

LeEaArRnNIinNgG NEewW ABbILilIiTtIiEeSs 
Once a character enters the game, learning further abilities CRrEeAaTtIinNgG NEewW TRrAaDdIiTtIioOnNSs 

must be paid for by the investment of Experience Rolls, and a com- Some characters may wish to create their own religious or totemic 
mensurate amount of study time. As previously mentioned, Games cults, sorcery schools, mystical paths or any other type of tradition 

118



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

they conceive of. Existing traditions are complete philosophies and THhEe GAaMmEeSs MAaSTstEeRr’’Ss SaAgGaA 
cannot be added to without tremendous research and effort, which Afler choosing what sort of traditions to use, Steve must come to a decision 
would probably be resisted by the status quo of their masters. How- on how many abilities each magical tradition should provide. Steve decides 
ever, new traditions can be created with fewer problems, although that he’d like his setting’s cults, schools and paths to grant a wide range of 
progressing in this manner is inherently more expensive in time and powers. Selecting the Magic Ruch category allows each to provide between 
effort than following an existing one. 7-9 spells, sparits, and so on; tweaking the actual number dependent on the 

Thus it can sometimes take years, if not a lifetime, of dedicated importance and central role of the tradition. 
practice to formulate a new tradition in comparison to learning an Since Theism is the dominantf orm of magic in the campaign world, Steve 
established one. However, the practitioner who successfully creates also grants each divine cult an additional 7-9 Folk Magic charms in addition 
a new tradition would be its grandmaster and founder, ever remem- lo thewr full range of 7-9 miracles. This substantially augments the potency 
bered for his efforts. of theistic cults in comparison lo traditions based on other types of magic, but 

Steve thinks it will give his setting a uniquely distinetf lavour: 
CRrEeAaTtIinNgG NEewW TRrAaDdIiTtIioOnNSs 

Although Steve likes the idea of making all magwc long and difficult to 
Experience Rolls 

Ability Added Months Required Required cast, he_finally chooses to go with the default casting times but keeping the 
option to boost the casting chance if spending additional time in preparation; 

Ist 3 7 since he wants magic to be an actwve part of the to-and-fro of combat. 
2nd 6 13 

3rd 10 19 

4th 15 25 REeSsTtRrIicCtTeEdD ACcTtIioONnSs 
5th 21 31 

DuuUrrRiInNgG CAaSsTtIinNgG 
6th 28 37 

Whilst performing magic, no matter what discipline, characters 
7th 36 43 

are only able to: 
Each +1 + (Ability Number+1) +6 

& Move at a maximum of walking pace 
& Perform Free or Reactive Actions 

Therefore characters cannot attack any foes whilst preparing a 
UssIinNgG MAaGgIiCc spell, or make any attempt to run or indeed perform any other skill. 

MYyTHRAS uses a number of default assumptions concerning the This reflects the deliberation needed to focus on the spell and chan- 
casting of magic. Since the same fundamental concepts are utilised nel the energy for it to have its desired effect. 
by each discipline, they have been collated here for easy reference At the Games Master’s discretion, some reactive actions such as 
and avoid unnecessary duplication. parrying or evading may make completing a spell more difficult due 

The following rules are intended to be globally applied to all of to disruptions incurred to the normally required somatic gestures or 
the magical disciplines — namely Folk Magic, Animism, Mysticism, mental focus. 
Sorcery and Theism. However, as with all of the guidelines offered 
in this chapter, the Games Master is free to tinker with these as InNtTeErRrRuUPpTtIinNgG CAaSsTtIinNgG 
desired so that they fit with his play style and campaign setting. All types of magic have casting times measured in Turns. This 

means a magician performing more complex invocations can be 
slowed down in their casting by reacting to threats which eat up their 

CAaSsTtIinNgG REeQqUuIiRrEemMEeNnTtSs 
available Action Points. However, unless the caster suffers some dra- 

Whether the passionate entreaties of a theist calling upon his god 
matic shock, all this does is delay the final completion of the magic. 

or the esoteric hand movements of a mystic, all magical disciplines 
To totally disrupt casting normally requires that the magician be 

are assumed to use ritual words and gestures to aid in the focussing 
injured or mentally suborned. The chance of this depends on the 

of concentration required for their proper incantation. 
precise circumstances: 

By default the following freedoms are required: 

& Minor Wounds force the caster to make a Willpower check, 
& Clear thought, unclouded by detrimental magic, narcotics or 

failure makes the casting one difficulty grade harder 
emotional stress 

& Serious Wounds force the caster to make a Willpower check, 
& The ability to gesture or symbolise with at least one free hand 

passing makes the casting one grade harder, whilst failing 
& The ability to make appropriate vocal sounds to invoke the 

makes it two grades harder 
formulae or request 

& Major Wounds automatically causes the casting roll to fail 
& The ability to accurately perceive or sense a potential target, 

& Succumbing to mental domination automatically causes the 
if the spell has to be targeted 

casting roll to fail 
Where one or more of these are denied to a magician, each miss- 

ing element increases the difficulty grade of the appropriate magic 
skill. A hedge wizard who is bound and blindfolded could attempt DiissmmisissiiInNgG ONnE’e'’s OwNn MAaGgIiCc 
to cast Folk Magic, but does so at a Formidable grade. With enough Characters can dismiss any magic they have personally cast as 
penalties it may become impossible to perform any form of magic. a Iree Action. No roll is needed for dismissing a spell; simply the 

decision needed to cease its effects. 

119



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MAaGgIiCc 

STtaAcCKkIinNgG MAaGgIiCc THhEe GAaMmEeSs MAaSTstEeRr'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Continuing hus theme of Sword and Sorcery, Steve decides that magicians 

In all circumstances, magic of different disciplines cannot be 
are rare and exalted, requiring specialised trainingfrom childhood. Access to 

stacked together to produce greater effects. Thus a Folk Magic spell 
hagher magical powers s restricted to characters that pursue a spectfic magical 

cannot add its effect to that produced by a theist Miracle for exam- 
professiwon, spectfically those who take the mystic, priest, sorcerer or shaman 

ple. In addition, magic of the same discipline which has a similar 
career. However; he likes the idea of Folk Magic being somewhat more com- 

purpose cannot be stacked. So two weapon enhancement magics 
monplace, but restricted to those who those who devote themselves to a specific 

such as Fireblade and Bladesharp cannot work together. 
cult or possess a mentor willing to teach them. 

In situations where two incompatible spells are in simultaneous 
In his game the three main player characters are Anathaym, Kara and 

existence, the magic with the greater Intensity take precedence, sup- 
Mju. As part of her back-story during character generation, Kara began her 

pressing or subsuming the lesser magic. Where both magics are of 
adolescent life as a sacred dancer in the temple of Myceras where her natural 

equal Intensity, the newer magic replaces the previous one. 
affinaty with the god was recognised. So she was trained to enter the preesthood 
permatting her access to Theism. 

MAaGgNnIiTtUuDdEe AanNDd InNTtEeNnSsIitTyY Mju was born a mountain nomad under the constellation of the Jackal, 
These two terms are methods of describing the potency of nomenally a lowly caste of hunter-scavengers, but blessed by a lunar eclipse 

magic. Magnitude is used to see how difficult it is to dispel the magic and the falling of seven stars. This auspicious astrological sign destined him 
whereas Intensity reflects its level of effect. More detail concerning lo be educated as a mystic of the Path of Shadows. 
these terms is described for each discipline. Of the three only Anathaym starts with no magical skills, having trained 

Although Intensity (and sometimes Magnitude) are based upon since chaldhood to be as great a warrior as herf ather. Since she did not begin 
the value of a magical skill, they are not modified by any difficulty the campaign as a professional magician she can never adopt any of the higher 
grades applied to the casting roll. For example, the Intensity of a magical arts, but could stull learn some minor Folk Magic charms if shefinds 
sorcery spell is one tenth of the sorcerer’s Invocation skill, no matter the right cult to join. 
whether the casting roll is Easy, Hard or even Herculean.. 

Mjjuu’’s SaAgGaA 
EnNDdUuRrIinNGg MAaGgIiCc COossTtSs Mju starts the game as a student of the art of mysticism. He has a score 

As a general rule, the Magic Points attribute (or pool) of a magi- 
i Meditation of 52 %, and Mysticism (Path of Shadows) 57%. Thus 

cian is temporarily reduced by the cost of all his ongoing active he knows three mystical talents (one_for each 20% of his Mysticism skill). 
magic. He is unable to start recovering Magic Points used to cast a Affler several sessions and the completion of a major adventure, Myu finds 
spell (or similar ability) until that magic is dismissed or expires. humself with 5 Experience Rolls with which he wishes to learn another of 

the talents taught by the Path of Shadows. The Games Master however says 
that Mju has already learned all of the talents available to one of his lowly 
standing. If he wishes to progressf urther; he must prove himself worthy to his 
guru and be_formally promoted to the rank of disciple. 

Mju sighs patiently, and instead uses the Experience Rolls to improve his 
other skills, hoping to impress his master by diligently practicing in those areas 
the old guru is always complaining are lacking 

Later... 

Mju is a faithful disciple of the Path of Shadows, butfinds it does not 
teach all of the physicalf eats he wishes to learn. Encouraged by hus master; he 
decides to go into retreat and meditate upon a new path of mysticism. 

Studying on his own, in the remote depths of the desert plateau, Mju 
notices the plucky hittle mice that scamper and hop amongst the rocks. Exper:- 
encing an epiphany he uses the rodents as the source of his new path, attempt- 
ing lo mimic therr abilities. It takes hum 3 months of contemplation and 
practice, and 7 Experience Rolls, to emerge with his newly developed branch 
of mysticism, which he names the Path of the Jerboa. This starts at the base 
Mysticism percentage of POW=+CON; and he gains (chooses) thef urst talent. 

Seeking to_further his path, Mju remains in isolation, spending another 
6 months and 13 Experience Rolls o add a second talent. At this point he 
Jeels he has done enough and must now see how his new path will serve him 
in the world. 

120



Mythras:  Folk Magic

| U G S [ R L L= = 1 1 LU SO QR <N < A o B | = < <Gl 

Folk Magic
| U G S [ R L L= = 1 1 I & KB A B« 7 o XN 

olk Magic is the lowest level of magic available to MYTHRAS 

F characters. Depending on the setting Folk Magic represents: AccCcEesss TtoO FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc 
Given its nature Folk Magic can be accessed in a number of dif- 

& Simple cantrips and spells taught within a community to aid 
ferent ways: 

daily chores and tasks 
& The magic of hedge wizards and witches who have not & Through a culture reflecting secrets known by a social group. 

exposed themselves to the higher forms of magic & Through a career representing knowledge used by a vocation. 
& A magical tradition with wide accessibility but a relatively low & Through a cult or brotherhood that has, over time, mastered 

level of power these magical forces. 
& Through an individual practitioner who may be willing to 

Although Folk Magic might appear to be weak in comparison 
share their knowledge. 

with magical approaches such as animism, theism and sorcery it can, 
& Through self-realisation from study or inner connection with 

if used wisely, be a very powerful tool. The balance comes in its rel- 
the world about them. 

ative ubiquity: Folk Magic may be more commonplace and easier to 
learn which leads to a wider range of use whilst not necessarily being Games Masters need to decide how Folk Magic is made available. 
confined to specialists. It might be very common, with every cultural group having access to 

certain spells that aid and support daily life. Or it might be restricted 
to specific groups or individuals, with the uninitiated aware of its 

THhEe NAaTtUuRrEe oOFf existence but unable to use it. Depending on the campaign setting, 
not every character can or should have access to magic. 

FoilLk MAaGgIiCc 
Tolk Magic is an unseen force that permeates the world and is STtaARrTtIinNgG FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc 

not derived from the gods but is an echo of the very earliest stages of As an exception to the general rule of thumb, characters from 

creation. Maybe it comes from life force, geomancy or perhaps the careers which specialise in Folk Magic may start with a number of 

cosmic radiance of constellations, but, whatever its source, its power spells equal to one tenth of their Folk Magic skill. 

is ubiquitous to those who know how to tap it. In campaigns where everyday people are permitted to pick up 

Tolk Magicians have attuned their senses to this faint resonance, the skill as a hobby or as part of their cult or culture, non-magi- 

tapping into the background energy to work magic on mundane cal career characters only start with the default number of spells as 

things around them. In worlds where magic is limited, these magi- described in the previous chapter (see Starting Magic on page 118). 

cians are valued for the small charms and blessings they can provide These default values may be changed as the Games Master 

to their community. In settings where it is more commonplace, peo- desires. 

ple use petty magics to ease their lives, aiding them in daily chores. 
Since the focus of Folk Magic is to reduce effort or augment com- LeEaArRnNIinNgG FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc 

fort, few of its spells are overtly specialised in the ways of death and Folk Magic is usually taught by someone skilled in its use. If avail- 
combat. Those arts are left to practitioners of higher magics. able culturally or professionally then such teachers are likely to have 

taught Folk Magic during a character’s formative years. If being 
learned during the course of a campaign, it costs three Experience 
Rolls, and takes one week to learn a new Folk Magic spell. 

121



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc 

Learning spells may also come with a monetary cost — depending Career Suggested Folk Magic 
on the teacher and perhaps the spell. Precise costs will be dependent 

Bladesharp, Find, Mobility, Pathway, Preserve, Slow, 
on circumstances, but as a general rule it costs 100 Silver of goods or Hunter i 

Speedart, Vigour, Warmth 
services per spell. Games Masters should adjust the base cost accord- 

Alarm, Appraise, Calculate, Cleanse, Find, Glamour, 
ing to how common lolk Magic is generally, who is teaching it, and Merchant . 

Lock, Translate, Voice 
whether or not the student has the benefit of cult or brotherhood 

. Bludgeon, Breath, Find, Ignite, Light, Might, Pierce, 
membership, special friendships, and so on. Tuition in Folk Magic Miner Lo 

Repair, Vigour 
may also be free in certain circumstances: attaining a particular rank 

i Avert, Befuddle, Demoralise, Find, Heal, Mindspeech, 
in a cult, say, or in recognition of services rendered. Mystic S . o B 

Spiritshield, Vigour, Witchsight 
Tor example a Healing cult might offer tuition in the Heal spell at 

. Alarm, Calculate, Find, Glamour, Lock, Mindspeech, 
arate of 50 Silvers to its members; whereas a local witch might offer Official . . . 

Translate, Ventriloquism, Voice 
to teach the spell at a base rate of 150 Silvers to the same student. A 
mother might even offer to teach her child the spell for free when he . Breath, Calm, Cleanse, Cool, Find, Heal, Preserve, Sleep, 

Physician 
Warmth 

or she leaves home for the wide world. 
If a Games Master wishes, professional folk magicians may Priest Any 

develop new spells for a suitable cost in Experience Rolls and time. ol Bladesharp, Deflect, Dry, Extinguish, Find, Pierce, Repair, 
ailor 

As a rough guideline, use the incrementing costs as presented on the Vigour, Warmth 

Creating New Traditions table on page 119. Appraise, Calculate, Calm, Extinguish, Find, Mindspeech, 
Scholar . . 

Tidy, Translate, Voice 

. Bladesharp, Bypass, Find, Incognito, Mobility, Pathway, 
cout 

UsbiiQquuiTittoous Speedart, Vigour, Warmth 

Shaman Any 

FoilLk MAaGgIiCc Sorcerer Any 

Thicf Bypass, Coordination, Darkness, Demoralise, Find, Glue, 
The table below is included for those campaigns where Folk ie 

Knock, Mobility, Ventriloquism 
Magic is available to common folk, rather than being restricted to 

. Bladesharp, Bludgeon, Coordination, Fanaticism, 
specialist hedge wizards and witches. Fach of the standard careers Warrior 

Firearrow, Fireblade, Find, Protection, Vigour 
has been presented with a list of generic spells useful to that partic- 
ular profession. 

Note: In regions predisposed to great heat rather than winter cold, any career offering 
Some spells are more prevalent than others, and Games Mas- 

Warmth as a spell can substitute itfor Cool instead (and vice-versa). 
ters are encouraged to tweak the lists to fit their campaign. For 
example, ostensibly similar careers may differ by one or two spells 
depending on the background culture and environment. Some of 
the rarer spells may be available to members of particular cults or UssIinNgG FoLlkK MAaGgIiCc 
brotherhoods. Tolk Magic takes only a single Turn to cast.Each spell costs one 

Magic Point which is deducted from the Magic Point total when- 
CAaRrEeEeRr--SSPpEeCcIiFfIicC FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc SPpEeLlLlSs ever it is successfully cast. Casting any spell successfully requires a 

Career Suggested Folk Magic Tolk Magic roll. The Folk Magic skill covers every spell a character 

Alarm, Befuddle, Bladesharp, Bypass, Find, Incognito, knows. Thus, a character with Folk Magic 70% would cast all their 
Agent - . 

Knock, Mimic, Ventriloquism Tolk Magic spells at this level: Folk Magic spells do not have discrete 
skill ratings. 

Alchemist Any 
If the Folk Magic roll is a... 

Beastcall, Find, Might, Mobility, Pathway, Pet, Slow, 
Beast Handler i 

Speedart, Vigour & Critical Success: the spell’s Magic Point cost is zero. 
Alarm, Appraise, Befuddle, Calm, Cleanse, Find, & Success: the caster loses | Magic Point and the spell works 

Courtesan 
Glamour, Sleep, Tune successfully. 

. Babel, Calculate, Calm, Fanaticism, Find, Glamour, & Failure: the caster loses 1 Magic Point, but the spell does not 
Courtier . . 

Mindspeech, Translate, Voice work. 
Appraise, Bladesharp, Calculate, Coordination, Find, & Fumble: the caster loses 1d3 Magic Points for the spell and 

Crafter A i . 
Ironhand, Pierce, Polish, Repair the spell fails to work. 

. Babel, Calm, Find, Glamour, Light, Mimic, Tune, 
Entertainer i i i Due to their minor or petty nature, all Folk Magic spells have a 

Ventriloquism, Voice 
default Intensity and Magnitude of 1. 

Beastcall, Bladesharp, Calculate, Find, Might, Preserve, 
Farmer . 

Repair, Vigour, Warmth 

i Beastcall, Deflect, Dry, Find, Pierce, Preserve, Repair, LimMiiTts TtoO FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc CAaPpAaCcIiTtYy 
Fisherman . 

Vigour, Warmth Characters have no actual limit to the number of Folk Magic 

Alarm, Beastcall, Find, Heat, Pathway, Pet, Slow, spells they can learn, provided that the Games Master permits them 
Herder 

Speedart, Warmth to have access to new ones. Such knowledge might be restricted or 
unavailable in the game world. 

122



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FOoolLkK MAaGgIiCc 

FoLlk MAaGgIiCc SPpEeLlLlSs ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Anathaym has never learned any FolkM agic as 1ts teaching has tradition- 

Tolk Magic spells are defined by various traits defining the effects ally been restructed to Meeros’s cults, and the priesthood. However Anathaym’s 
of the spell, and any particular limitations. Every spell is different sister, Kara, s an acolyte of Myceras, and has been learming Folk Maguc as 
with some having fewer traits than others. part of her own training 

While Anathaym recovers from the injuries to her right hand, Rara uses 

DuurraaTtIioOnN oOFf FoOLlkK the time to teach her the Bladesharp spell - a useful warrior’s cantrip, and one 
generally learned by Meeros’s soldiers. 

MAaGgIiCc SPpEeLlLlSs 
Unless a spell has either the Concentration or Instant traits it has 

TRrIigGgGEerR 
a natural duration which lasts the entire scene or action for which 

Trigger spells can be cast successfully but have their effects 
the spell was used. A few spells have custom durations noted in the 

delayed by the caster. If the spell is not triggered during the scene it 
spell’s definition. For example, using Pathway to traverse a section of 

dissipates naturally. 
thorny and overgrown woodland would last until the terrain clears, 
and the spell is no longer necessary. 

TrrRaAIitTSs SPpEeLlLlSs 
Tolk Magic Traits are as follows: 

ALlaArRmM 
COoNnCcEeNnTtRrAaTtIioOnN 

Special Duration 
The spell’s effects remain in place as long as the caster continues 

Casting Alarm on a location such as a room or small clearing 
to concentrate on maintaining it. Concentration requires the caster 

creates a temporary psychic bond between the area and the caster. 
to be free of all physical and mental distractions: any such distur- 

If the area is accessed by a living creature with a SIZ greater than 
bance interrupts the concentration, resulting in the spell’s immediate 

1, the caster is automatically made aware that something has trans- 
dismissal. 

gressed no matter how great the distance. The Alarm is usually a 

InNsStTaAnNTt distinct tingling sensation or mental twinge which will awaken the 

The spell’s effects happen immediately. It has no duration. caster. Alarm can also be used on an individual object, triggering 
when touched or moved. 

RAaNnGgEeDd The spell does not determine who or what has crossed the 

Spells with the Ranged trait can be cast at a distance of up to the alarmed threshold, and neither does it prevent ingress. It lasts until 

character’s Folk Magic score in metres. The caster must know the triggered, but the Magic Point used to cast it does not recover until 

location of the target, such as ‘hiding behind the door’: if they are the spell is dismissed or concludes naturally. Once activated Alarm 

unable to directly see or sense the target of the spell, then the Folk must be cast again. 

Magic roll becomes one grade harder. 

APpPpRrAaIiSsEe 
ReessiistT (EEnNdDUuRrAaNnCcEe,, EVvAaDdEe,, WIiLlLlpPoOWwEeRr)) 

Instant, Touch 
Any spell that is not readily accepted by a target can be actively 

Appraise allows the immediate assessment of the quality of phys- 
resisted using either Endurance, Evade or Willpower, as determined 

ical goods of combined ENC or SIZ equal to the caster’s POW. The 
by this trait. To successfully resist a spell, the target must win an 

spell determines whether or not identical looking items are of the 
opposed roll of the relevant skill against the caster’s Folk Magic cast- 

same or similar quality, or if one or more is either flawed or of a 
ing result. If the target fails in the opposed roll then the spell takes 

higher quality. The spell does not work on organic things, only on 
effect as normal. Note that resisting is usually a passive action if 

inanimate objects. Neither does it determine what flaws or enhance- 
Endurance or Willpower are the being used. If a spell requires the 

ments are present; merely that they exist. 
target to Evade then it costs an Action Point to make the Evade 
attempt. Targets without Action Points to spend in evading will 
therefore be powerless against the spell’s effect. AVvEeRrTt 

Instant, Ranged 

ToucHh Avert 1s used to dismiss another Folk Magic spell within range. 
The caster must be in physical contact with the target whilst the Avert can be cast reactively to neutralise offensive spells, by using the 

spell is cast. If a target is intent on resisting physical contact then the Counter Magic Reactive Action. 
caster will most likely fail to complete his spell unless some specific 
circumstance prevents the target’s withdrawal, such as surprise or BAaBbBbLlEe 
the Grip special effect. A touch spell merely needs to contact the 

Resist (Willpower), Touch 
target or its carried accoutrements in order to work. 

Babble mangles anything spoken by its target. It does not affect 
what the target is thinking, only what is verbally issued. Thus Babble 
can seriously disrupt orders being issued by a commanding officer to 
his troops, but it cannot influence what the commander is thinking 

123



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc 

or his intentions. Depending on the necessity for verbal components, BLluUdDgGEeoOnN 
Babble may be able to adversely influence spell casting. 

Touch 
Bludgeon is similar to Bladesharp but used on weapons and tools 

BeasstcaLlLl (XX ) that deal blunt-force trauma rather than cutting or piercing damage. 
Instant, Ranged, Resist (Willpower) It is normally used to aid with threshing grain, fulling wool, or sim- 
Beastcall is used to attract a single, specific animal, the type being ilar heavy duty work. 

specified in the spell, within range. The animal summoned cannot 
be sapient, and it may also resist the spell using its Willpower. If it BRrEeAatThH 
fails to resist, it is naturally drawn, in a passive fashion, to the caster, 

Touch 
whereupon the spell dissipates, and the creature acts as it normally 

Breath permits the recipient to hold their breath for an extended 
would, finding itself in proximity to the caster. Physical obstacles 

period, so that they can temporarily venture into harmful environ- 
or adverse actions (such as a wall, river or line of spears, or a harsh 

ments, such as underwater; or atmospheres tainted by rock dust, 
yank on a set of reins or leash) also cause the spell to fail. 

gases, smoke or poisons. The spell lasts for a maximum of half the 
caster’s POW in minutes, during which time the recipient cannot 

BEeFfuUDdDdLlEe speak or the breath is lost, and they immediately begin to asphyxiate 
Ranged, Resist (Willpower) (or become poisoned). 
Befuddle causes confusion within the mind of a corporeal target. 

The subject of the spell has difficulty thinking straight, forgetting ByrpAasss 
where it is, what it is doing, and why — often lapsing into disassoci- 

Touch, Trigger 
ated lines of thought. Befuddled targets can still act in self defence, 

Bypass is used to cross the threshold of an area under the effect 
but cannot initiate any constructive activity until the spell ends. 

of an Alarm spell without triggering the Alarm. When cast the spell 
Any sort of attack or threatening action instantly breaks the spell, 

is held in preparation, triggering on contact with an Alarm spell. Of 
whether or not it was directed specifically at the befuddled target. 

course the caster must suspect that an Alarm spell exists in the first 
place. Bypass does not negate the Alarm, and it must be cast for each 

BLlaADdEeSshHAaRrPp crossing of the Alarm spell’s threshold. 
Touch 
Bladesharp is cast on edged and piercing melee weapons. It CAaLlCcUuLlAaTtEe 

increases the damage of a weapon by one dice step, and inciden- 
Instant, Ranged 

tally leaves the edge honed after the spell concludes. This spell is 
Calculate allows the immediate calculation of numbers, weight 

often used on tools such as logging axes, ploughs and razors. Thus 
or size of a thing, be it soldiers amassed in battle formation, the 

casting this spell on a dagger increases it to 1d6+1 damage, whereas 
length of a rope or weight of a sack of rice. The spell always yields 

the same spell on a great axe would increase it to 2d8+2 damage. 
a precise quantity, but not value or quality. Only items which are 

(1d4>1d6>1d8>1d10>2d6>2d8>2d10) 
directly observable (seen, lifted, smelled, and so on), and within 
range can be calculated. The spell will work when cast on a con- 
tainer — assuming, of course, that the container is not empty. 

CaAlMm 
Ranged, Resist (Waillpower) 
Calm attempts to dampen down the passions or the target, 

perhaps ensuring that a lovesick paramour doesn’t press his suit, 
a frightened rival doesn’t scream for help or that weapons are not 
drawn in anger. A calmed person is not otherwise mentally affected, 
thus any sort of assault or threatening action still permits the target 
to defend themselves, and even attack, albeit they will do so in a calm 
and level headed manner. 

CHhIiLlLl 
Instant, Touch 
Chill dramatically reduces the temperature of small objects (with 

an ENC no larger than a third of the caster’s POW) down to the 
temperature of ice water. Useful for rapidly cooling hot items, chill- 
ing drinks, and so forth. The spell does not freeze an object, and 
neither does it cause any damage to its structure: it merely renders 
it very cold. 

124



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FOoolLkK MAaGgIiCc 

CLlEeaANnSsEe DEeMmOoRArLaIliSsEe 
Instant, Touch Ranged, Resist (Waillpower) 
Cleanse is used to rid an object, person or small area of dirt, Demoralise temporarily fills the target with a sense of despon- 

grease, grime, bad smells, and so on. It does not organise or tidy the dency towards a particular person, species, situation or object. When 
target or area; merely cleans them to a spick-and-span state. This confronted with the subject of this despondency, any proactive skill 
spell is often used to launder clothes. The caster can cleanse an arca attempts made by the afflicted character related to the source are 
equal to POW in square metres. one grade harder. However a direct assault from the subject instantly 

breaks the spell. 

CooLl Thus a character could be given a demoralising dread of heights, 
ensuring that any Athletic skill used for climbing or Acrobatics skill 

Concentration, Touch 
for balancing would be one difficulty grade harder. 

Cool protects the recipient from the effects of muggy atmospheres 
and heat prostration, guarding them from any Fatigue caused by 
the natural environment. The spell does not stop the effects of heat DIiSshHEeVvEeLl 
related magic, but will make any resistance roll one difficulty grade Instant, Touch 
casier. Someone under the effects of this spell wearing full hoplite Dishevel is the reverse of the Cleanse spell. Objects affected are 
armour could march through a tropical rain forest during the height immediately covered in grime, dust, cobwebs, and so forth. The 
of summer without harm. Cool affects a target of SIZ up to the spell can be used to make brand new objects look old and weath- 
caster’s POW x2. ered or help prevent normally well turned out people from being 

recognised. The caster can dishevel an area equal to POW in square 

COoOoRrDdIiNnAaTtIioOnN metres. 

Touch, Trigger 
Coordination enhances manual dexterity and agility when per- DIiSsrRuUPpTtIioOnN 

forming a single task. When cast in preparation it permits the recip- Instant, Ranged, Resist (Endurance) 
ient a chance to re-roll a single skill check where coordination is Disruption is used for damaging or dissembling physical objects 
required, such as Acrobatics, Lockpicking and so on. The recipient without the need for tools. It is commonly employed to drive off or 
may choose the better of the two rolls, but the spell is expended in kill living creatures, such as birds or vermin. When successfully cast, 
the process. Disruption inflicts 1d3 damage to a single random Hit Location or 

the overall Hit Points of an object. In both cases the damage ignores 

CUuRrSsEe any armour or natural protection. 

Special Duration 
Curse must be cast in combination with a second spell of a Drry 

harmful nature. Its one and only effect is to increase the duration of Instant, Touch 
the accompanying spell so that it is continuous. This comes at a cost Dry removes all extraneous moisture from an object or person, 
however, since the Magic Point used to cast the curse does not return either slicking off to form a puddle or evaporating in a cloud of 
until the caster drops the curse willingly, the curse is dispelled, or the vapour. It is normally used to dry off after heavy rain or help protect 
spell to which it is bound breaks naturally. Curse is commonly com- equipment from rotting, but has a number of other versatile uses. 
bined with spells such as Befuddle, Demoralise, Dullblade, Repug- The caster can dry an object up to POW x2 in SIZ. 
nance, and so on. 

DUuLlLlBbLlaAdDEe 
DAaRrKkNnEeSsSs Ranged 

Concentration, Ranged Dullblade is the reverse of Bladesharp reducing the keenness of 
Darkness creates an area of shadow, equal to POW in square weapons and tools. It reduces the damage inflicted by the weapon by 

metres, which suppresses all light within it. This is enough volume one step, and can never keep a sharp edge. 
to fill a modest room, a length of corridor or form a small cloud if 
cast outside. All non-magical light, including sunlight, passing into EXxTtIinNgGUuIisShH 
or present within the boundary is reduced to the equivalent of a 

Instant, Ranged 
dim glow. 

Extinguish immediately quenches flames and small fires of mod- 
est size and heat. It is useful for dousing candles, lanterns, torches or 

DEeFfLlEeCcTt small cook fires, but it will not work on magical or larger, more fero- 
Touch cious conflagrations such as pyres, burning houses or dragon flames. 
Deflect wards the recipient against tiny impacts of foreign mate- 

rial, such as rain drops, a cloud of midges or even flying grains of 
sand. The protection is limited to individual objects smaller than a 
child’s fingernail, and thus cannot prevent normal missile weapons 
from striking a character. 

125



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc 

FaANnAaTtIicCIisSmM flammable materials alight if held to them for several rounds (see 
Fire on page 79). Wooden hafted weapons under the effects of Fire- 

Ranged, Resist (Willpower) 
blade will be consumed as part of the spell. 

Fanaticism is the reverse of Demoralise. It grants the target a 
wildly excessive or irrational devotion, dedication, or enthusiasm for 
a particular person, species, situation or object. Its effect is to grant FRrOoSsTtBbIiTtEe 
the recipient a temporary Passion equal to the Folk Magic skill of Ranged, Resist (Endurance) 

the caster. Fanaticism can be used to counter Demoralise, and vice Trostbite works directly on living, organic tissue, inflicting numb- 

versa. ness and pain in one of the recipient’s extremities, for example fin- 
gers, toes, buttocks, nose & ears, and so on. The caster must either 

FinndD (XX ) touch a specific extremity or roll randomly if cast at range. If the 
spell is not resisted the area affected suffers sensory numbness fol- 

Concentration, Ranged, Resist (Special) 
lowed by lingering pain for the duration, making skill tests utilis- 

Find has many variations, always specific, and learned as sep- 
ing that location one difficulty grade harder. Frostbite does not deal 

arate spells. Some common examples are given below. It works by 
direct damage but makes the affected area of limited use for a while. 

attuning to the natural emanations of a creature or thing, alerting 
Tor instance, a victim suffering frostbite to the buttocks cannot sit 

the caster to its presence within the spell’s range. Find can be blocked 
without extreme discomfort. 

by dense or thick materials such as metal, or earth and stone at least 
one metre thick. The spell cannot discern emotions or thoughts. 

Find Arrows: Locates ammunition shot by hunters, which miss GLlaAmMOoUuRr 
their target. Concentration, Ranged, Resist (Wallpower) 

Find Flaw: Identifies any flaws in an object, such as hidden imper- Glamour makes the target alluring so that people are naturally 

fections or physical damage. attracted to them. The particular nature of the glamour must be 

Find Luvestock:  Locates a particular type of animal. Can be chosen when cast, and can be anything from increased natural 

resisted with Willpower. beauty, a softer more sultry voice or even a seductively perfumed 

Find Loot: Locates precious metals and gems. body scent. Whilst the spell grants no mechanical benefits, it does 

Find Object: Locates a lost personal possession. ensure that the recipient will gain a chance to gather themselves an 

Find Sickness: ldentifies the existence of disease and illness, audience, engage the attention of someone they wish to make con- 

whether magical or mundane. tact with, or provide a distraction enabling accomplices an opportu- 
nity to perform nefarious deeds. 

FiIrReEaArRrRoOwW 
Touch GLluEe 
Firearrow causes all missiles thrown or fired by the recipient to Touch 

burst into flame when released. Ostensibly created to act as a signal Glue cements together two solid, inanimate objects for the dura- 

flare, it has since evolved into a combat magic. Missiles under its tion of the spell, for example a cart wheel to its axle or a door to 

effect add an additional 1d3 damage, but are extinguished if they its frame. Whilst under the effects of the spell the items, no matter 

impale flesh. Those that strike flammable material have how disparate, cannot be parted unless something actively tries 

a chance equal to the caster’s Folk Magic skill of to wrench them apart. In this circumstance the spell has 

setting alight whatever they lodge in, such as a Brawn skill equal to five times the caster’s POW, 

wooden shields, thatched roofs, and so and fails when a superior Brawn is set against 

on. Wooden ammunition is consumed it, defeating it in an opposed roll. Once 

as part of the spell. the spell concludes or fails the items part 
completely unharmed. 

FIirReEbBlLaAdDEe 
Touch HEeAaLl 
Fireblade is similar to Fire- Instant, Touch 

arrow but is instead cast on Heal has several different 

hand tools and melee weap- effects depending on the nature 

ons. The original purpose of of the ailment it is being used on. 

the spell is to sterilise surgical If the subject is suffering from a 

equipment, aid in slash and minor complaint such as a head- 

burn agriculture or provide ache, back pain, hangover, cold, 

illumination during darkness warts, and so on, then the symp- 

without the need to carry toms are immediately lifted. Cast 

an additional light source. If on a location suffering a Minor 

cast on a weapon it inflicts Wound it restores all lost Hit 

an additional 1d3 damage, Points instantly. Against Serious or 

and has the chance of setting Major Wounds no Hit Points are 
recovered. However the spell will 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FOoolLkK MAaGgIiCc 

stabilise locations, stop all bleeding, and prevent imminent death directly against a Darkness spell to counter it. In this case both spells 
from inattention. are consumed, leaving the ambient light to illuminate the area. 

HEeaAtT Lock 
Instant, Touch Special Duration, Touch 

Heat dramatically increases the temperature of small objects Lock magically secures any device that already has a mechanical 
(with an ENC no larger than a third of the caster’s POW) up to the bar or lock present. A Locked device can be opened only by the 
temperature of boiling water. This versatile spell is useful for mulling caster, and cannot be picked by mundane means (such as by a thief 
wine, cooking food without a fire, or warming a bed prior to sleep. using lock-picks) since the magic renders the mechanism immobile; 
It does not affect living tissue although it can affect clothing and however it could still be forced open by breaking the object the lock 
armour, heating it to uncomfortable levels. is set into. The magic remains in place until opened by the caster, 

after which the device must be subject to a further casting of Lock 

IgGnNIitTEe to restore the enchantment. The Magic Point used to cast Lock does 
not recover until the spell is dismissed or concludes naturally. 

Instant, Ranged 

Ignite only works on flammable inorganic matter, causing a small 
object or hand-sized area to burst into flame. Depending on what MAaGgNnIiFfYy 
was set alight, once burning, the flames may then spread unless Concentration 
quenched or countered in some way. This spell is normally used Magnify allows the caster to see something twice as close as it 
to light candles, torches or lanterns from afar. It can also be used really is. Useful for close work as well as out in the field. 
to start a camp or cooking fire in adverse conditions, such as using 
damp kindling or in strong winds. MiiGgHhTt 

Touch 
InNcCoOGgNnIitToO Might permits the recipient to engage in impressive acts of phys- 

Resist (Endurance), Touch, Trigger ical brawn. It adds the caster’s POW to the recipient’s STR, but 
Incognito alters the facial features of the recipient to a bland, only for the purposes of lifting, breaking, and contests of strength 

unmemorable countenance. It does not affect the voice, manner- as defined under the Brawn skill. It does not increase the character’s 
isms or physical size /presence of the recipient, but ensures that visu- Damage Modifier when inflicting combat damage. 
ally they do not stand out from the crowd.Anyone under the effects 
of Incognito is actively ignored by those who might otherwise be Miimiic 
searching for him; he is simply overlooked and discounted. 

Touch, Trigger 
Mimic allows the recipient to perfectly mimic the voice and man- 

IrRoOnNhHaAnNdD nerisms of someone the caster has seen and heard personally. It does 
Touch not affect their physical appearance. 
Ironhand allows the recipient to hold anything that would oth- 

erwise cause damage (such as extremely hot or cold items, or those MIiNnDdSsPpEeEecChH 
dripping acid) without causing themselves injury. Thus a user could 

Concentration, Ranged, Resist (Wallpower) 
grasp a brand from a fire, lift a bubbling cauldron from a spit or 

Mindspeech allows telepathy between the caster and a target, 
even reach through a steam vent to grab an object on the other side. 

enabling verbal intercourse without needing to speak aloud. The 
It does not grant total immunity from damage, merely stops it from 

caster and target must share the same language, or else the spell 
conducting through the skin of the recipient’s hands. The spell does 

will merely transmit unintelligible gobbledegook. Attempting to cast 
not protect anything worn on the hand, so rings, gloves, and such 

Mindspeech on somebody beyond range automatically fails. 
like will suffer the effects of the source. 

KNnOoCcKk Moosibuilrity 
Touch 

Instant, Touch 
Mobility increases the Movement rate of the recipient by 1d3 

Knock magically unfastens any device that is currently secured 
metres for the spell’s duration. It is often used by hunters, herders, 

with a mechanical bar or lock. It does not work on magically locked 
and those secking to escape pursuit. 

objects, only mundane ones. The spell only affects a single fastening, 
so if there are several locks and bars securing the object, the spell 
will need to be recast for each one. PaAtThHwWAaYy 

Touch 

LiIgGhHTt Pathway enables the recipient to more easily travel through 
heavy vegetation, safe from being scratched, snagged or otherwise 

Concentration, Ranged 
hindered. Under its enchantment Movement rates are not reduced 

Light must be cast on an inanimate object (this could be a branch, 
in woods, jungles, swamps, and similar overgrown terrain. 

sword blade, spear point, torch, and so on). It produces enough light 
to illuminate an area as though with a lantern. It can also be cast 

127



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc 

PEerRfFuUmMEe The spell only protects against physical damage so won’t help 
against events such as fire, choking, and so on. 

Concentration, Ranged, Resist (Willpower) 

Perfume either negates a noxious odour or imbibes an odourless 
substance with a pleasing fragrance. The spell does not affect the REePpAaIirR 
properties of the source of a stench (so a rotting carcass is still rotten) Instant, Touch 

- it merely makes its presence tolerable. Repair fixes physical damage to an inanimate object. Each sepa- 
rate successful casting repairs 1d3 Hit Points of damage. 

PEeTt 
Concentration, Resist (Willpower), Touch REepPuUgGNnAaNnCcEe 
Pet allows the caster to take mental control of a small creature, Concentration, Ranged, Resist (Waillpower) 

sending it off to scout, fetch or perform some other complex task. It Repugnance twists the appearance of the target so that they 

can be cast on any creature neither of whose SIZ and INT charac- cause distaste in all those that see, hear or smell them. The partic- 

teristics may exceed half the caster’s CHA. If the targeted creature ular effect must be chosen when cast, and can be anything from a 

is the already the loyal pet of the caster it does not need to resist the great wart on the end of a nose, a high pitched nasal voice or even 

spell. pungent body odour. Whatever is chosen, it will cause people to turn 
away from the victim or make excuses so as to leave their presence 

PHhAaNnTtaAsSmM as quickly as possible. 

Concentration, Ranged 
Phantasm allows the caster to weave together insubstantial or ShHoOCcKk 

near weightless objects so that they take a shape or ghostly form. Instant, Ranged, Resist (Evade) 

Thus a spectral figure could be woven from a naturally occurring Shock produces a mild electrical discharge which may be directed 

mist, or a face formed in a pile of dead leaves. Beyond this the spell at living things. The caster must either touch a specific extremity or 

has little effect, save to frighten, intrigue or disconcert those that roll randomly if cast at range. If the spell is not resisted, the shocked 

view it. location is stunned for 1d3 Turns; armour does not protect. The 
spell makes a loud crack when cast. 

PIieErRcCEe 
Touch ShHOoVvEe 
Pierce can be cast on any item with a point, helping it to pene- Instant, Ranged, Resist (Special) 

trate thick surfaces. It is normally used to help sew leather, punch Shove allows the caster to telekinetically move an object by giv- 

holes in metal or hammer pitons into stone. Any weapon or tool ing it a single crude push. The item is not moved with enough force 

enhanced with this spell ignores the first two Armour Points of the to inflict damage, and is still subject to gravity. The spell affects an 

person, creature or object struck. amount of ENC or SIZ equal to the caster’s POW. Living targets 
can resist with either Endurance or Evade. 

PoLliishH 
Instant, Touch SLlEeEePp 
Polish instantly buffs an object of ENC or SIZ of up to the cast- Resist (Endurance), Touch 

er’s POW to a high sheen making it glossy, shiny, and highly desir- Sleep sends its recipient into a deep, peaceful sleep. It has no 

able even if the quality of the article is sub-par. effect on creatures with a SIZ greater than the caster’s POW. Unless 
the target resists, it slumbers for a number of hours equal to the half 

PRrEeSsEerRvVEe the caster’s POW. However the spell takes 1d3 Rounds to take effect 
before the target falls unconscious. Any attempt to cast this spell in a 

Instant, Touch 
combat situation automatically fails. 

Preserve prevents organic matter, both vegetable and animal, 
from bacterial decay and putrefaction for 1d3 months, by sterilising 
it. If the material is later smoked, pickled or salted it is preserved SlLooww 
indefinitely. The spell can halt decay that has begun, but not reverse Ranged, Resist (Endurance) 

it. The caster can affect an amount of organic matter with SIZ or Slow is the direct opposite of Mobility, slowing Movement Rate 

ENC equal to their POW. by 1d3+3 metres, if the target fails to resist. 

PRrOoTtEeCcTtIioOnN SpPeEeEdDaARrTt 
Touch Instant, Touch, Trigger 

Protection is useful in a wide range of tasks where there is a risk Speedart boosts the velocity of thrown or fired missiles so that 

of accidental injury such as working in a foundry or mine. The first they travel farther before losing efficacy. The spell increases the 

time the character would normally take damage that penetrates effective range by 1.5 times the weapon’s normal distance. 

protective clothing or armour, the Protection spell will trigger, and 
reduce the damage taken by 1d3 points. The spell then dissipates. 

128



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  FOoolLkK MAaGgIiCc 

SPpIirRIitTsShHIieElLdD CRrEeAaTtIinNgG NEewW FoOLlkK MAaGgIiCc SPpEeLlLlSs 
Concentration, Resist (Willpower), Touch There are doubtless many spells Games Masters may want to introduce that are 

This spell creates a shield around the recipient which deters spir- not covered by those provided in this chapter. If inventing new cantrips, some points to 

its from entering. Any spirit wishing to attack or possess the recipient bear in mind to keep Folk Magic reasonably balanced are: 

must overcome the spell by winning an opposed test of their Will- 
&K As noted, Folk Magic spells are limited in their effects. Avoid introducing 

power against the caster’s Folk Magic skill. 
spells that have multiple or far-reaching effects. 

&K Spells are utility-based: that is, to aid a mundane task in some way. Try to 

TidDyY create spells that remain focused on aiding daily life rather than being whole- 

Instant, Ranged sale_forces for destruction. 

Tidy immediately restores a number of items (up to the caster’s & Note that Folk Magic spells do not, by and large, provide skill bonuses or 

POW) within the spell’s range to a neat, tidy, and orderly fashion. penalties. Those that affect living things do so in subtle or limited ways. 

Items larger than 3 ENC are shifted to a more orderly position but K One does not need to create spells that have a measurable game mechanics 

will require manual intervention to tidy properly. effect. Folk Magic spells can provide background colows; flavous; and atmo- 

sphere. Clever magicians will find creative uses for them. 

TIirReE N s 
Ranged, Resist (Endurance) 
Tire inflicts one level of Fatigue on the subject unless resisted. VoIiCcEe 

Concentration, Ranged, Resist (Wallpower) 
TRrAaNnSsLlAaTtEe Voice amplifies the recipient’s intonation and delivery so that it 

Concentration, Resist (Willpower), Touch becomes compelling when issuing verbal commands. All who can 
Translate permits the caster to understand any language spoken hear the speaker are forced to listen. Their vocalisation also car- 

to him, by setting up a psychic link with the target. The translation ries across and through even the loudest background noise (howling 
provided is often imperfect, as complex terms or concepts cannot be gales, the roar of a waterfall, the clash of arms on a battlefield) up to 
comprehended, but it does allow simple communication. The spell arange of ten times the recipient’s CHA in metres. 
works between sapient creatures with a definite, constructed lan- 
guage, and still relies on being able to see, hear or otherwise perceive WAaRrMmTtHh 
the target as in normal conversation. If cast upon a creature of ani- 

Concentration, Touch 
mal awareness, communication is restricted to the simple reception 

Warmth protects the recipient from the effects of freezing atmo- 
of emotional state. 

spheres and exposure, and from Fatigue caused by the natural envi- 
ronment. The spell does not stop the effects of cold-related magic 

TuUNnEe cast at them, but will make any resistance roll one difficulty grade 
Instant, Touch easier. Thus a person under the effects of this spell could walk about 
Tune ensures that the musical instrument touched is in perfect on a glacier during midwinter in their underclothes without harm. 

pitch no matter the dampness, temperature or its general condition, Warmth affects an object of SIZ up to the caster’s POW x2. 
ensuring that the following performance is unaffected. 

WAiTtCcHhSsIigGhHTt 
VEeNnTtRrIilLoOqQUuIisSmM Ranged, Resist (Waillpower) 

Concentration, Ranged, Resist (Willpower) Witchsight allows the caster to see active magic, enchanted items, 
Ventriloquism allows the caster to project their voice anywhere and invisible entities (although such things are simply shadowy 

within range. The caster needs only to think the projected words, representations) that lie within range and line of sight. It can also 
not actually to speak them physically, which can disconcert those penetrate illusions or discern the true guise of shapeshifted crea- 
unaware of what is going on. If cast upon a living creature, the tures. Beings which wish to remain hidden or disguised must win an 
caster can take control of their vocal cords, and speak through them opposed test of their Willpower versus the casting roll. 
instead. 

VIigGoOuURr 
Touch 
Vigour makes the recipient feel alive and energetic, being used 

to offset the effects of strenuous physical labour. For the spell’s dura- 
tion, all Fatigue effects gained from laborious activity are ignored 
(but return on the spell’s dismissal). It negates the effects of a Tire 
spell. 

129



Mythras:  Animism

oy X 2 o % o F WKW MK K EX M T XN 

Animism

oy X 2 o % o F WKW MK K EX M T XN 

nimism is magic worked through communion with spirits the material world so that it seems at once familiar and alien. Spir- 
and the spirit world. It is the magic of shamans and spirit its fill the Spirit World and whirl constantly through it. Also found 

A walkers. Such practitioners do not treat with gods or learn here are the faint souls of mortal beings whose spirits are still bound 
their abilities from books or tomes; instead their powers come from to a material body. These appear as pale shadows, and can some- 
the myriad spirits that inhabit the spirit realms, and interact occa- times be hard to perceive. Many spirits collect in habitats that mirror 
sionally with the mundane world. Shamans are sensitive to their mundane world communities and settlements; others congregate in 
presence, whether these entities are nature spirits, representatives of clearly defined regions that are alien or hellish to human perception. 
particular natural objects, the souls of revered ancestors, or malign Nothing physical can exist there, only the non-corporeal. 
things such as disease and curse spirits. 

Animism relies on forming multiple relationships with many spir- 
STtAaTtEeSs oOFf BEeIinNgG 

its, that themselves embody magical effects which are made available 
A soul or spirit that inhabits a physical thing, be it a living body 

to the shaman. Gathering spirits requires negotiation, sometimes 
or an inanimate object, is defined as being corporeal. A corporeal 

combat, and frequent expeditions into the Spirit World. 
spirit cannot enter the Spirit World until drawn forth from its mate- 
rial residence. 

WHhAaTt ARrEe SPpIiRrIitTSs? Conversely a soul pulled from its physical body into the Spirit 
Spirits are a metaphysical manifestation of a particular aspect World is considered duscorporate. Whilst discorporate, souls are sepa- 

of the cosmos. Most are intrinsically linked with something existing rated from the senses and sensations of their body. 
in the material world that reflects and represents the spirit’s nature The last state of being applies to spirits that naturally reside in 
and influence. A spring in a glade, for instance, may well have a the Spirit World, and lack any tie to a physical body or object. These 
spirit representing its beauty and serenity; a species of animal has are defined as mangfested when they emerge into the mundane world. 
a guardian spirit watching over it, an archetype of all that the spe- 
cies is and does; ghosts, and certain restless spirits of the dead, are 
tied to the place where they died; ancestor spirits are linked to the 
communities they once inhabited. Spirits are non-corporeal, possess TRrAaNnCcEe AanNDd BIinNdDIinNgG 
motivations, perceptions and outlooks very different to those of the Animists learn two magical skills, Trance and Binding. Trance 

material world, and have, through their connections with the Spirit enables the animist to perceive spirits and enter the Spirit World. 

World, developed great powers and abilities. Binding allows animists to summon, dominate, and bind spirits in 
spirit combat. Every animist learns Trance and Binding as part of 
his training, which is always conducted by a shaman or high sha- 

WHhAaTt i1sS tThHEe SPpIiRrIitT WOoRrLlDd?? man. Would-be animists learn which natural features are linked with 
The Spirit World mirrors the mundane world, and resides close a spirit or the Spirit World, and become sensitive to the shifts, and 

to it, intersecting with it in some places, but is otherwise invisible and whorls of the Spirit World as it intersects with the mundane world. 
quite separate. The Spirit World is unfettered by the laws of phys- 
ics, meaning that conditions there can be very different to those of 
the mundane world: time may pass differently or have no meaning; TRraANnCcEe (CCOON+POW)) 
colours may seem more vivid and pronounced. All physical effects in Trance represents the animist’s awareness of the Spirit World, 

the Spirit World are the results of the spirits themselves. As a plane and his ability to move between it and the material world. Anyone 

of existence it is infinite. It has no shape, yet reflects all aspects of with Trance can, on a successful roll, detect, but not observe, the 

130

< 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

TRrAaNnCcEe PRrEePpaARrAaTtIioOnN TIimMEe 
BIinNdDIinNgG (PPOOWW+CHAA)) 

Converse  Project Self 
Observe ’ Binding is the skill used by animists to induce or force a spirit to 

Cult Rank L. With or Draw 
Spirits .. .. perform to his will. It has a range of applications: 

Spirits Spirit 

Tollower 1 Hour - - - « It can bind spirits into fetishes, places or creatures, and con- 

Spirit ] trol their actions once bound. 
i 1 Minute 1 Hour - - 

Worshipper & Tt can be used to persuade a spirit to perform a single deed for 
a mutually acceptable service. 

Shaman 1 Round 1 Minute 1 Hour - 
& It can be used to summon a known spirit from across the 

High Shaman 1 Action 1 Round 1 Minute 1 Hour 
Spirit Plane, provided its corresponding physical location is 
within the skill’s value in kilometres away. 

presence of spirits within a range equal to their POW in metres. The & Tt can be used to engage in Spirit Combat. 

skill i3 capable of far more - but such secrets are jealously guarded The POW of the largest spirit which can be coerced, bound or 
by tribal shamans, and only revealed to those who progress higher in controlled cannot exceed three times the critical range of this skill. 
a spirit cult’s hierarchy (see page 196). Each further level of knowl- Thus a character with a Binding skill of 45% could control spirits 
edge allows the skill to be used in new ways, permitting observation, of up to 15 POW. 
communication, and eventually freedom to travel the Spirit Plane. When used to engage in Spirit Combat, the value of the Binding 

Interacting directly with the Spirit Plane takes time, normally skill is used to calculate the amount of damage inflicted by the ani- 
requiring that a ritual be performed to enter a trance-like state. The mist - see the Spirit Damage Table. The same table is used by spirits 
amount of time required depends on the ability being used (see for their Spectral Combat skill. 
Trance Preparation Timetable), and costs a single Magic Point. 

If the skill check is successtul then the animist can perform the 
SPpIirRIitT DAaMmAaGgEe 

following, dependent on his cult rank: 
Skill Value Damage Inflicted Average Roll 

& Tollower - Can observe and identify spirits within range, using 01-20 1d2 2 

their natural senses. 21-40 1d4 3] 

& Spirit Worshipper - Can converse with spirits within range, 41-60 1d6 4 
via empathic communication. 61-80 1d8 ) 

& Shaman - Can project their own soul onto the Spirit Plane. 
81-100 1d10 6 

They can also draw a spirit into the material world (or expel 
101-120 2d6 7 

a spirit possessing a mortal) for a time equal to their POW in 
121-140 1d8+1d6 8 

minutes. Spirits unwilling to manifest (or depart) may resist 
using their Willpower in an opposed roll against the Trance 141-160 2d8 9 

skill of the Shaman'. 161-180 1d10+1d8 10 

& High Shaman - Can drag the souls of others onto the Spirit 181-200 2d10 11 

Plane with them, at a cost of 1 extra Magic Point per addi- 201-220 2d10+1d2 13 

tional person. Unwilling participants can resist using their 221-240 2d10+1d4 14 
Willpower in an Opposed roll against the Trance skill of the 241-260 2d10+1d6 15 
High Shaman'. 

261-280 2d10+1d8 16 

Shamans and High Shamans may travel the Spirit Plane to 281-300 3d10 17 

observe and locate other spirits. The skill provides an understanding Each +20% Tollow above progression 

of the abstract geography and nature of the region, and the shaman 
can travel up to his skill’s value in kilometres away from his body. 
From the Spirit Plane a shaman who succeeds in a Perception test 
can also distinguish the souls of corporeal creatures in the material SPpIirRIitT SOoCcIEieTtIiEeSs,, 
world, and thus hunt for particular species or even seek out specific 
people. CuuLlts & TRrAaDdIiTtIioOnNSs 

If the roll is a critical success then entering the trance is achieved In cultures where animism is the main form of religion, spirits 

one step more quickly (with a minimum of one Action). If the roll and fetishes are ever present, and a shaman fulfils the same role as a 

is fumbled, the shaman is barred from entering the Spirit Plane for priest. In settings where animism is a core part of belief] spirits are 

a full day. fundamental parts of society, and treated with reverence, respect, 
and fear — not as magical batteries or buffs. Most people will have a 
shrine to revered ancestors or several fetishes holding totem spirits, 
and will take part in ceremonies of remembrance and revitalisation. 

Animists who walk the otherworld binding spirits against their 
will, treating them as accoutrements, will soon gain a poor reputa- 

1 If the unwilling target succeeds in resisting, they cannot be affected by the same Shaman or High 
tion — not only amongst their peers but also amongst spirits friendly 

Shaman again, until a full day has passed. The range of these abilities us the Shamans POW in 
to that culture— and gradually be alienated as a result. 

metres. 

131



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

share one simple insight: the world is alive. Each rock, 
plant, animal, and each cloud, pool and storm has its 
own spirit. 

These spirits, especially the spirits of ancestors, 
might also be members of a tradition or be friendly 
towards it. Others simply have no interest in the mun- 
dane world. Some may even be actively hostile to 
members of a particular tradition. Because there are 
so many ways to approach spirit worship, cults tend to 
be diverse, but as a rule of thumb each spirit tradition 
tends to have: 

& Direct access to 1d3+3 specific types of spirit 
which are friendly to the tradition. 
& Knowledge of how to locate a further 1d3 types 
of spirit that are neutral with regards to the tradition. 
& At least one enemy or competing cult, its own 
allied spirits being treated as actively hostile towards 
the tradition. 

Depending on the setting, most will have access to 
allied medicine, nature and ancestor spirits. These are 
the core spirits upon which a cult can be based, but it 
is not necessary for a cult to possess knowledge of all 
of them. The types of allied spirit can vary with the 
focus of the tradition. 

In settings where animism co-exists with theism or 
sorcery, Guardian spirits become necessary allies or 
neutral spirits to have access to, whereas they are not 
really needed in animism-only settings. 

Elemental spirits of differing Intensities will be 
available to cults having particular affiliations to large 
scale natural phenomena, such as earthquakes or 
floods. Usually (save for some high fantasy or Sword 
& Sorcery settings) curse, death and bane spirits are 

Most animists possess enough skill in Trance to see the spirits not an active part of any particular tradition, and any 

around them when they meditate. It is highly unlikely that they will shaman attempting to bind them into service is taking a serious 

ever engage in a life and death battle in the Spirit World, since that risk. The remaining types of spirit are not commonly worshipped, 

is the shaman role. Thus most lay animists are content to master and tend to be propitiated rather than made into allies, unless the 

enough skill in Binding to learn the proper means of address and campaign requires diabolical spirit cults to act as antagonists for the 

state of mind needed to safely invoke the power of their bound characters. 
Spirits. 

The shaman is the bridge between the mortal world and the 
Spirit World. He lives a life in two realms, and with his help mem- 
bers of the community can pass through to the Spirit World to con- DEeFfIinNIinNgG SPpIiRrIitTSs 
verse with those who have gone before. From omnipresent spirits of nature to the restless spirits of the 

Powerful shamans tend to attract attention in the Spirit World. undead, the inhabitants of the Spirit Plane are varied and diverse: 

When viewed there the shaman’s soul echo is often the subject of but what exactly is a spirit? 

many spirits seeking attention. This can be highly distracting for the Typically a spirit is an intangible entity lacking any physical sub- 

shaman, and may attract the attention of predators; but a powerful stance. At their simplest they are magical fragments of life-force 

shaman should have a strong enough web of allies that most hunters cycling between the material world, and the mythic or metaphysical 

would rather stalk less powerful prey. However, player character sha- sources of the universe. 

mans should expect occasional very unpleasant surprises. Spirits are generally aware of their surroundings and capable of 

Although most spirit worshippers will be a member of a cult or reacting to circumstances. Those with plant and animal sentience 

tradition, the organisation is unlikely to be anywhere near as formal use their base empathic drives, such as love, hunger or fear, to com- 

as a theistic cult or mysticism order. Spirit cults tend to be loose municate. Sapient spirits are fully intelligent, capable of far more 

affiliations of animists or may simply consist of members of single subtle communication approaching that of true language. 

family, clan or race who venerate particular spirits. These traditions Souls are spirits that remain tied to a living, physical body in the 
material world. This isolates them from the Spirit World, denying 

132



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

them the primordial state that they should occupy. The only ways To create a spirit that originates in the Spirit World, decide on 
for a soul to transcend to the Spirit World are: its Intensity then roll POW as defined by the Spirit Intensity table 

(1d6+18, for instance, for an Intensity 3 spirit). 
& Through death, sundering the physical and spiritual, liberat- 

The lowest Intensity spirits are by far the most prevalent, but 
ing the soul to attain its next stage of existence. 

offer the least amount of benefit. A spirit with an Intensity of zero 
& Being made discorporate through the actions of another 

cannot affect the material world in any noticeable manner. Intensity 
spirit. 

6 (and greater) spirits are stretching beyond the control of a lone 
& Using the Trance skill to temporarily free the soul. 

animist, but may still be summoned, bargained with or even bound 

The nature of a spirit depends on its source and purpose. An by several practitioners working together. 

animal spirit roams the Spirit Plane in similar places to its physical 
SPpIirRIitT InNtTEeNnSsIitTyY 

counterparts. They are attracted by their kin, and drawn to con- 
ceived young within which they incarnate as souls, moving to the Intensity pPOW POW Range 

material world through the miracle of physical birth. When they 0 1d6 1-6 

eventually die they return to the Spirit World, only to be recycled 1 1d6+6 7-12 

once again. 2 1d6+12 13-18 

Other types of spirit serve different purposes, and their powers 3 1d6+18 19-24 

have a resonance affecting the mundane world. For example ele- 
4 1d6+24 25-30 

mental spirits drive the natural phenomenon of the material world 
5 1d6+30 31-36 

via their actions on the Spirit World, having a cosmic emanation 
+1 +6 +6 

that transcends the metaphysical barriers. An angered hurricane 
spirit tears through the Spirit World, and its anger is felt as mon- 
strous winds on the material world. A restless earth spirit causes the CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCcSs 
ground to shake through earthquakes and rock slides. Spirits also possess two other characteristics: either INT or INS 

Certain malevolent spirits bring sickness or death. A plague spir- (Instinct — see the Creatures chapter), and CHA. 

it’s contagion spreads to the physical world where disease affects INT/INS This reflects their level of intellect when alive or the 

many. A curse spirit’s malignance lingers across the mundane world, corresponding physical creature if one exists. 

bringing misfortune to those touched by it. CHA reflects the force of the spirit’s personality in very much 

Ancestor spirits are the souls of particularly powerful and revered the same way as for player characters. CHA varies widely according 
individuals that retain their identity after death to guard their com- to the nature and type of the spirit; more detail is provided in the 

munities and faithful. Communing with the ancestors can yield descriptions of specific spirits starting on page 145. 

advice, guidance, and secrets that provide aid in the mundane world. 
Then there are the restless dead: spirits that remain tied to the ATtTtRrIibBUuTtEeSs 

physical world, unable or unwilling to pass fully into the spirit realm 
Lacking a physical body, the attributes of a spirit or discorpo- 

to be reincarnated in the great circle of being. Natural, peaceful 
rated soul are calculated using different Characteristics to corporeal 

death results in the soul passing between the worlds easily, and with 
creatures. Spirit Attributes are reckoned in the following way: 

grace. Violent, unwarranted death can inhibit the transition, caus- 
ing the soul to linger in a limbo state between the corporeal and ACcTtIioOnN POoIiNnTtSs 
discorporate. Ghosts and other restless spirits yearn for the transition Calculate using the sum of INT and POW (see Action Points 
to the Spirit World but have been denied it: in this state they become table page 8). 
obsessive, aggressive, selfish entities that can bring pain and torment 
to the living — even though all they seek is the peace that the natural InNIitTiIaAtTIivVeE BOoNnUuSs 
order of the cosmos dictates should be theirs. Figure using the average of INT and CHA. 

PIRIT NTENSITY MaAaggGic PoIiNnTts 
Spirit Intensity

Calculated as normal, but are used by spirits and souls as their 
All spirits have an Intensity. Intensity is based on a spirit’s POW, 

Hit Points. A spirit’s Magic Points do not recover whilst bound to a 
and measures three things: 

fetish or location, nor when summoned to the physical world; they 

& The benefit it can give to the spirit’s controller. only begin to heal on return to the Spirit Plane. (Also see the alter- 

& How difficult the spirit is to bind and control. native concept of Tenacity on page 139) 

& The spirit’s ability to influence the material world. 
SPpIirIitT DAaMmAaGgEe 

The greater a spirit’s POW, the greater its Intensity. The Spirit Based upon the value of a spirit’s Spectral Combat skill or a 
Intensity table can be used in a number of ways to determine this soul’s Binding skill: see the Spirit Damage Table on page 131. If 
relationship. a discorporated character lacks Binding, they use half the value of 

To determine the Intensity of] say, a recently deceased creature, their Willpower on the table instead. 
cross reference its POW range from life with its Intensity; most 
player characters, when they die, will produce Intensity 1 or 2 spir- 
its, for example. 

133



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

would travel to a burial or execution ground, knowing that here the 
ATtTtIitTuUdDEe 

links to the Spirit World where such spirits lurk are strongest. 
Each spirit has an attitude towards animists who approach it: 

Of course not all animists need to travel blindly through remote 
friendly, neutral or hostile. A spirit’s attitude affects how it will react 

wilderness locations to find a specific type of spirit. A guardian of 
to being contacted, to being bound, and what it might do if it ever 

a necropolis might, for example, have immediate access to many 
escapes a binding. 

ancestor spirits whilst the Spirit Tradition of a nomadic clan may 
Spirits that belong to the animist’s tradition will most likely be 

maintain cult knowledge of a dozen secret locations where certain 
friendly to the practitioner, and willing to ally with them. A bear 

spirits gather (See Spirit Cults page 193). 
spirit, for example, if being bound by a shaman of the Great Bear 

Locating a spirit normally requires an animist to either: 
Clan, would be friendly towards an approaching shaman; neutral 
at worst. & Scour the mundane world, using Trance to view the Spirit 

Neutral spirits consist of both those that belong to traditions Plane, on the off chance of noticing a suitable specimen. 
which are not hostile towards the shaman, and those not considered & Shift fully into the Spirit World to search for a specific spirit. 
part of any tradition. & Journey to a location known to his tradition, where particular 

Hostile spirits belong to enemy traditions or are inherently antag- spirits are reputed to reside. 
onistic due to their nature. Ior example a tradition with wolf spir- & Have someone of greater skill, rank or knowledge summon a 
its will find that most prey animal spirits are distinctly hostile to it. known spirit for the animist. 
Whilst water spirits and fire spirits are immediately hostile towards 

Spirits might be relatively easy to locate: knowing how to control 
each other. 

one is an entirely different matter. Each spirit has its own idiosyncra- 
sies regarding how it can be found, propitiated or bound. Shamanic 
cults and spirit traditions possess fragments of this lore, which can 

LoOCcAaTtIinNgG AanNDd influence their skill regarding particular spirit types. For example, 
the shamans of the Great Bear Clan know that the spirit of the 

GAaIiNnIinNgG SPpIiRrIitTSs Great Bear should never be approached during the winter when all 

In the Spirit World spirits can be found inhabiting objects or bear spirits hibernate. They also know that the best place to encoun- 

locations relevant to their originating power; subterranean caves for ter Grandfather Bear, when he is at his least aggressive, is after mak- 

darkness spirits, forests for plant spirits, and so on. Remote places ing a sacrifice of favoured prey — such as a large salmon caught fresh 
are generally favoured because there is diminished interference from from the water. 
other, more disturbing sources of magic. In the case of more tran- Once located, animists may approach spirits in two ways: 

sient spirits the locale can shift. Lesser herd beast spirits are found 
& Negotiation: looking to strike a bargain, in return for a sin- 

following the great migrations for example, with more powerful ones 
gular service. 

found instead at mythic Death Grounds where the greatest beasts 
& Binding: seeking to bind the spirit into continued service. 

go to die. Frequently the location is a place of striking or beautiful 
appearance. 

Ancestor spirits typically live in communities mirroring their 
SPpIirRIitT NEeGgOoTtIiAaTtIioOnN 

corporeal homes, or may have made for themselves a new home, 
Animists will make contact with many spirits over time, some 

such as a Feasting Hall, Medicine Lodge or Spirit Manse. Indeed all 
of their own tradition, others not. Rather than binding them all to 

ancestor spirits may be found in one location but with clear delinea- 
service as fetishes, most animists attempt to strike bargains — pro- 

tions between old culture and origins. 
viding something the spirit wants in return for a singular service for 

As the mundane and Spirit worlds intersect, animists who want 
the animist. 

swiftly to access the Spirit World location for a particular kind of 
In negotiation, the spirit must be willing to bargain, and be either 

spirit, travel to the real-world equivalents of the spirit abode. A sha- 
friendly or neutral towards the animist. If remaining in the mate- 

man wanting to contact the Great Bear spirit would travel deep into 
rial world this requires the animist to successfully enter a detached 

the woods and find the hunting trails and territories of mundane 
reverie using his Trance skill, and possess the ability to communi- 

bears. A High Shaman seeking to locate and bind a death spirit 
cate with the spirit, in line with a cult rank of Spirit Worshipper or 
higher. Alternatively the animist can ask a shaman or High Shaman 
to manifest the spirit in question. 

SPpIirRIitT REeLlAaTtIioONnSsHhIiPpSs 
Once communication has been established, the animist may then 

Over the course of a campaign, some spurit allies may be willing to 
request the spirit’s aid to perform a single task in return for per- 

undertake tasksfor the animist or evenf ightf or kim by attacking an enemy 
forming a like service for the spirit. Some spirits are willing to enter 

in spurit combat. Thus kind of independent behaviour should be the result 
into a more formal arrangement by providing the animist with their 

of mutual respect or perhaps a debt of gratitude, but must be something 
name, becoming an ally. In response the animist agrees to undertake 

that unfolds over time in play. The possibility exusts that a friendship may 
some sort of repeating task or accept some form of geas or compul- 

grow between a amimast, and an allied spirit, in which case the Games 
sion in line with the spirit’s nature. On the most abstract level it can 

Master should feel free to use the spirit as the animast’s future fetch (if 
assumed that the task will cost the animist a number of Experience 

suitable for the setting) or as a_fully fledged non-player character to con- 
Rolls equal to the spirit’s Intensity per year to complete the service 

tnue the relationsthup. 
or suffer the inconvenience. 

N 4 

134



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

Such bargains can be settled by decision of the Games Master, or 
resolved with an Opposed Test of suitable skills, such as the suppli- SEeTtTtIinNgGSs WwIitThHoOUuTt SPpIiRrIitTSs 
cant’s Influence skill versus the spirit’s Willpower. Failure to reach an 1In somef antasy settings magicians are able to travel the ethereal planes 

accord has no further effect. Fumbling the roll however, may cause in spiritform, yet encounter no ecology of spurits other than the souls of 

the spirit to react with anger. other Animism practitioners. This need not be a kandrance, since sprrits 
are not strictly necessary for an accomplished spiritualist who has mas- 
lered the necessary skills. 

SPpIiRrIitT BIinNdDIinNgG For example, a practitioner can stull use the Trance skill to pass mes- 
Binding a spirit always requires the animist to engage the spirit sages over great distances, provide warnings to dreaming mortals, and act 

directly in Spirit Combat. If he is able to compel a bargain (see page as a very effective spy or scout. Similarly the Binding skill can be used 
138) or lower the spirit to zero Magic Points, and its POW does not lo combat opposing psychics, possess the physical bodies of others, and 
exceed the limit set by his Binding skill, the animist may then bind it perhaps even killfrom afar. 
into a fetish, a location, or a creature; each type of binding necessi- Thus a magician or psychic should never be underestimated just 
tating its own requirements in terms of use and vulnerability, often because they lack a comprehensive collection of bound spirits. The utility 
in the form of taboos. of their skalls us limated only by the imagination of the player. 

 FEeTtIisShH  BIinNDdIinNGgSs 
A fetish is a ceremonial object that embodies magical power. Any non-aggravation from otherwise harmless activities like dancing, or 

item can become a fetish for a spirit, but amongst primitive cultures, the establishment of regular propitiatory sacrifice to placate it. 
fetishes tend to be items made from an item associated with that Only the binder, or the cult he belongs to may exert command 
spirit (a bear’s claw or tooth, for example, or its hide). a location-bound spirit. If two or more animists of that cult vie for 

Whilst confined within its fetish a spirit cannot be harmed by control over the spirit, it is resolved similarly to struggles over a fetish. 
hostile magic or other spirits; it remains in stasis, unaware of its sur- 
roundings. For an animist to use its magical ability a bound spirit CRrEeAaTtUuRrEe BIinNDdIinNGgSs 
must first be called from the fetish, to serve the holder. The binding Spirits can also be bound into the body of a living creature. In 
still exists, but the spirit is now able to exert its power and travel up principle the creature is loyal to whoever bound it, or the person 
to its POW in metres away from the fetish. they have assigned it to. 

Over time any animist possessing a fetish takes on some of the Advantages are that the spirit may recover Magic Points natu- 
spirit’s essence. So the owner of a bear tooth holding a bear spirit rally, can move freely as allowed by its body and gains immunity 
may feel dozy in winter or take on bearish odour. Fetishes holding from direct magical assault (as per a fetish). 
curse or sickness spirits may emit a miasma that induces minor Drawbacks are that it is now vulnerable to physical damage; the 
symptoms in the holder, making the fetish extremely unpleasant. spirit’s abilities only affect the body it is bound to; the creature must 
Conversely a stone holding a Fire spirit would be warm to the touch be tattooed or branded with the spirit’s binding; and most dubitable 
- which may occasionally be useful. of all — unlike Possession — the creature’s original soul must be per- 

Since the spirit of a fetish only submits to the control of who- manently sundered from its body, in effect killing it to make space 
ever is holding the object, animists closely, and jealously guard their for the new spirit. 
fetishes. It is usually taboo to touch an animist’s fetish without his Totemists are avid practitioners of creating such living fetishes, 
permission, and those who try risk the animist’s ire. placing spirits into the bodies of their totem animals who then act as 

In certain circumstances two or more animists might end up animal companions. 
struggling for physical control over a fetish, and by inference the Some spirits with the Animate ability can be bound into corpses. 
spirit bound to it. In these cases both should roll their Binding skill as In such cases the bound spirit cannot regain Magic Points. 
an Opposed test, the winner gaining command over the spirit until 
challenged again. 

LoOCcAaTtIioOnN BIinNDdIinNGgSs FEeTtIisShH PRrOoLlIifFeErRaAtTiIoOnN 
A spirit can also be bound to a specific location. This is usually In most cultures a Shaman s a combination of preest, doctor; teackher, 

done to protect an area. Unlike a fetish the spirit is able to roam the lawyer; undertaker; and spiritual border guardf or their community. Most 

area specified by the anamist when it was bound, but no further than of thewr efforts are taken up with mundane affairs, and they have very little 

ten times the spirit’s POW in metres from the exact spot the binding time_for the exertion requiredfor creating extraneous fetishes. Communaty 

occurred. members might gain a fetish as an adulthood ritual, and maybe others afler 

Within this region the spirit is both visible and vulnerable to signifwant rites-of-passage. 

direct magical assault, unless it has the Manifestation ability to travel The number of fetishes prevalent in a community depends on many 

back and forth from the Spirit Plane (although it will still be trapped Jactors such as whether lower ranked members of the cult are permatted 

in the binding area). In return the spirit may use its powers, and lo own fetishes, if fetishes are reserved for those of a particular sex or 
freely interact with anyone within the location. profession, and whether the tradition has existed so long that previously 

Often hostile spirits are bound to locations instead of fetishes, createdf etishes are handed down as heirlooms within famalies. In general, 

imprisoning them so they cannot cause harm. In such cases the bind- shamans have more important things to do than provide magic items_for 

ing taboo is usually linked to oaths of not trespassing into the area, wandering characters. 

N\ 3 

135



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

CRrEeAaTtIinNgG aA BIinNdDIinNgG 
The creation of a binding costs one Experience Roll per point USsIinNgG SPpIiRrIitTSs 

of Intensity of the spirit. This represents the time and development Aspirit’s magical effects are persistent, lasting until it is sent away, 

needed to prepare the item, location or creature in which the spirit countermanded or recalled to a fetish. This can make animists for- 

will be held. The ritual usually takes one week, at the end of which midable foes. However, manifested spirits are vulnerable to magic 

the animist should roll the spirit’s Characteristics randomly, based that specifically targets spiritual entities. If so dismissed or destroyed, 

on its Intensity. It is always possible that the spirit gained may be too the spirit is gone for good until a replacement can be summoned. 

powerful for the animist to control. Animists generally use their spirits in one of two ways: call upon 

An animist can attempt to improve the binding’s potency to con- a materially bound spirit, or summon a spirit from afar to perform 

tain a more powerful spirit of the same type by paying the differ- an agreed task. These two different uses have different methods of 

ence in Experience Rolls. Thus an animist with a fetish capable of resolution. 

containing an Intensity 2 Animal Spirit could upgrade it to hold 
an Intensity 3 Animal Spirit by paying one Experience Roll. The CAaLlLlIinNgG UPpOoNn aA BIinNdDIinNgG 
animist can also replace the spirit of a fetish with one of the same Depending on its attitude a bound spirit will see its binding as 
type of the same Intensity, at no additional cost in Experience Rolls, either a prison or a positive relationship with its owner. Hostile 
provided the spirit can be found or a shaman persuaded to do the spirits are always seeking to hinder or undermine whoever dared 
finding. to command it; friendly spirits are sanguine and obeisant. Neutral 

The recipient of a fetish or creature binding does not need to spirits have little care either way. How the spirit behaves when called 
have bound the spirit himself. Lower ranking worshippers of a spirit upon is thus dependent on its attitude. 
cult often gain spirits through undertaking a ritual in collaboration Commanding a bound spirit takes an Action, costs 1 Magic 
with a shaman who binds it for them. While the shaman searches, Point, and requires a Binding skill roll. Depending on the result of 
the supplicant fasts and meditates, or sings and dances, purifying the roll the following occurs: 
himself in preparation for the gift of the spirit. The bound spirit 
counts against the supplicant’s limit, not the shaman’s. & Critical Success: The command is not only successful, but 

Animists of less than Shaman rank are not prevented from costs the animist no Magic Points. 

undertaking the search and binding a spirit personally, save that such & Success: The spirit is commanded successfully, and performs 

tasks are sometimes dangerous, and would be frowned on by peers the deed requested of it. 

of the community if, for instance, the attempt ended with a mali- & Failure: The spirit ignores the command. The animist must 

cious spirit possessing the would-be fetish maker. wait until his next Turn to try again. 

Shamans usually only provide spirits to members of the same & Fumble: The command is so badly botched the binding is 

tradition or in recompense for great favours. Even then shamans broken, allowing the spirit to return to the Spirit Plane or to 

will usually only bind friendly spirits associated with their cult in turn on the animist if hostile. 

this manner. Seeking out spirits of a disparate or contrary nature is 
A spirit that escapes the authority of the animist, can act freely 

dangerous for both the shaman and the supplicant. 
until it is compelled to obey. 

Physically destroying a binding, by killing the host creature or 
While under control a spirit performs its instruction to the best 

shattering its fetish for instance, immediately unbinds the spirit it 
of its abilities, yet if the animist wishes it to perform a different task, 

contains. Upon gaining its freedom a spirit can either return to the 
he must issue a new command with the requisite Magic Point cost 

Spirit World or, if hostile, possibly attempt to attack the animist who 
and Binding skill roll. There is always the possibility of losing control 

imprisoned it. Malicious shamans sometimes booby-trap places with 
of a spirit and, the more powerful a spirit is, the more dangerous it 

easily broken fetishes containing dangerous spirits. 
is likely to be. 

A spirit can be voluntarily unbound from its binding by its owner. 
If the spirit’s POW is greater than the limit set by the user’s Bind- 

Many reasons exist to do this, such as wishing to replace the spirit 
ing skill, any attempt to command it fails. 

with a less damaged version. Owners can only manumit a spirit from 
In the specific case of a fetish, the bound spirit emerges from 

its bondage if their Binding skill is capable of handling the POW of 
its binding-object as a Iree Action to perform the first command 

the shackled spirit. 
given it. Returning the spirit to the fetish costs the animist an Action 
Point on their Turn, but no further Magic Points. Only if the spirit 
is neutral or hostile to the animist is a Binding skill check required 

LimiiTts tToO BoOUuNnDd SPpIiRrIitTSs to succeed. 
The maximum number of spirits an animist can hold in bondage 

depends on cult rank: 
SuUmMMmOoNnIiNnGg aA SPpIiRrIitT 

« Follower: s of CHA Animists can summon spirits they have successfully negotiated 

& Spirit Worshipper: half of CHA with previously or know the true name of - the latter something 

& Shaman: ¥s of CHA which is normally held secret by members of the animist’s cult or 

& High Shaman: All CHA tradition. 
To conjure the spirit the animist uses his Trance skill to make 

If this number is ever exceeded, then the strongest spirit or spirits contact with the Spirit World (though he need not enter it). Assum- 
break free, possibly extracting revenge if they were hostile to the ing the spirit is within range, the animist may then issue a summons. 
binding. Neutral spirits may be simply mischievous. 

136



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

ATtTtIitTuUdDEe oOFf aA SuUmMMmOoNnEeDd SPpIirRIitT replaying of a painful memory from the opponent’s past life, or 
forcing them to confront and overcome a hidden phobia. A combat 

Binding 

Test Allied Spirit Neutral Spirit  Hostile Spirit might even be a light-hearted contest: riddling perhaps, or boastful 
attempts at one-upmanship and humiliation. The outcome though, 

Animist wins Spirit repeatedly Spirit serves once Spirit serves 
is usually serious. 

serves the animist for grudgingly, 
Generally only spirits and animists initiate Spirit Combat, as 

the remainder of the and attempts 

scenario to pervert the characters without the Binding skill lack knowledge of how to fight 

command in this way. 

Spirit wins Spirit serves once Spirit departs Spirit turns on 

then departs in the animist EnNGgAaGgIinNGg iInN SPpIiRrIitT COoMmBbAaTt 
friendship Spirit Combat works almost identically to normal combat save 

that mortal combatants (if present in the Spirit World) use their 
The summoning attempt costs the animist a number of Magic 

Spirit Attributes, rather than physical attributes, as described earlier 
Points equal to the spirit’s Intensity, and requires a Binding test: 

in this chapter. 

& Critical Success: The spirit anticipates its summons, arriving Rather than wielding weapons, spirits have a Spectral Combat 

in 1d3 rounds. skill to make psychic attacks and parries. Animists use their Binding 

& Success: The spirit hears the summons, and arrives in 1d6 skill, whereas those uninitiated in Animism must rely on their Will- 

minutes. power skill instead. 

& Failure: The spirit fails to notice the call. The animist may try As with physical combat, each attack and parry exchange in 

again the following day. Spirit Combat is treated as a Differential Roll. If one or more levels 

& Fumble: The spirit is mortally offended by the manner of the of success are achieved then Spirit Combat Special Effects may be 

summons. The bond between the summoner, and the spirit is selected (sce table). 

suspended until the animist can offer amends for his affront. In addition, a successful attack which is not parried, inflicts an 
amount of damage equal to the attacker’s Spirit Damage roll to the 

What happens then depends on the spirit’s attitude towards its defender’s Magic Points. (For settings with no natural Magic Points 
summoner, and whether it owes the animist a service. To determine see Tenacity, page 139) 
how helpful or malicious it is, the spirit makes an opposed test of its If the defender runs out of Action Points with which to defend 
Willpower against the animist’s summoning roll. Refer the result on themselves, then they are left wide open, and the attacker may 
the Attitude of a Summoned Spirit table. attempt to make an unopposed attack roll. Corporal characters 

Note that if the POW of the spirit is beyond the capability of the engaged in Spirit Combat in the physical world may forgo their 
animist to control, it may act independently or place its own inter- attack in order to cast magic or perform a physical act instead. 
pretation on a service demanded of it. Fleeing Spirit Combat is not always possible. If the fight occurs 

in the material world, characters obviously cannot escape unless they 
OBbSsEeRrVvIinNgG MAaNnIFifEeSsTtEedD SPpIiRrIitTSs physically depart the area the spirit occupies. On the Spirit Plane 

In the Spirit World spirits are imperceptible to any corporeal however, a discorporated animist can, instead of trying to damage 
creature, save for those with the Trance skill or some other such their opponent, declare that they are using a Combat Action to try 
ability such as a mystic’s Spirit Sense trait. However, spirits brought and escape back to their body. An Opposed test of the animist’s 
into the material world are manifested, potentially allowing them to Trace skill against the spirit’s Spectral Combat is required. If the 
become detectable by natural means. animist wins they break free, and the combat ends, but if the spirit 

Spirits can manifest in a number of ways. Normally spirits which wins then the animist fails to get away. It is impossible for souls who 
augment the animist form a ghostly shape, whirling intangibly as do not have the Trance skill to consciously escape from the Spirit 
an aura about the summoner. Embodied spirits infest, and actually World as they have no knowledge or understanding of how to move 
modify the animist’s physique, whereas a possessing spirit lurks ethe- within it. Only if they defeat or drive off their attacker will they be 
really within the mortal shell of the animist. How perceivable the freed from its discorporation. Otherwise they must be rescued by 
spirit is depends greatly upon the setting. an animist. 

Combat continues until the fight is concluded by use of a Special 
Effect, or one of the combatants is reduced to zero Magic Points, at 

SPpIirRIitT COoMmBbAaTt which point they are defeated. 

Since most spirits are intangible, conflict must be resolved by 
other means than the clash of weapons. 

Spirit Combat in the mortal realm usually takes the appearance 
of ghostly shapes swarming the body of their transfixed victim. 
Nothing stops the mortal from physically responding if they desire, 
save for futility if they lack magic to affect the spirit assaulting them. 

Within the Spirit World however, such combats can be com- 
pletely abstract in both the challenge presented, and in the appear- 
ance of the participants and their surroundings: it does not need 
to resemble a conventional fight. Instead an attack could be the 

137



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

SPpIirRIitT COoMmBbAaTt SPpEeCcIiaALl EFfFfEeCcTtSs 

Special Effect Offensive Defensive Specific Roll Description 

Bleed Essence X X Critical Only Inflict a psychic wound which leaks 1 Magic Point per cycle, until Spirit Combat ends 

Attacker makes an opposed roll of their Influence against the Defender's Willpower. If 
Compel Bargain X 

successful combat ends, and they force the defender to perform a deed 

Drive Off X Mortals Only Spirit must resist attack roll with Willpower or depart the combat 

Leech Strength X Ciritical Only Attacker absorbs the Magic Points inflicted by the attack 

Obscure X Critical Only Attacker can no longer perceive the defender, unless attacked again 

Assuming spirit is capable of possession, the defender must resist its attack roll with their 
Possess X Spirits Only 

Willpower or become possessed 

Psychic Stun X X Opponent loses next Turn 

Restrain X X Mortals Only Prevents the spirit from fleeing or engaging others in Spirit Combat 

Spirit Lance X Roll Spirit Damage twice, and take the best result 

Sunder Binding X X Spirit Fumbles Breaks the fetish or binding the spirit came from 

Suppress Ability X X Mortals Only Shuts down one of the spirit's abilities currently in use 

Turn Back X Attacker suffers its own Spirit Damage roll instead of the defender 

The defender may automatically disengage from Spirit Combat, returning to their body 
Withdraw X 

(if mortal), fetish or the Spirit Plane (if a summoned spirit) 

COoNnSsEeQqUuEeNnCcEeSs oOFf DEeFfEeAaTt Note that some of the above consequences can only be chosen 

If a participant in Spirit Combat reaches zero Magic Points they by spirits capable of that action. Animists, however, are taught the 

are reduced to a helpless state. Several things may then happen: necessary skills to be able to freely choose any of the consequences 
known to their cult. 

& Possessed: Certain spirits may possess the loser’s body, to Defeat does not inevitably need to result in something bad. Many 
inflict their malignance. (see Possession and Exorcism page Spirit Combats are not antagonistic at all, but rather a test of an ani- 
140). mist’s strength or the abstract representation of a negotiation where 

& Bound: If the loser is a spirit it may be bound into a fetish, the spirit and animist are debating with empathic images and mem- 
location or creature binding. ory. Winning such a challenge sways the loser to regard the victor 

& Exorcised: If the loser is a spirit currently possessing a mortal, with respect, perhaps even capitulating a passionately debated issue. 
then it can be exorcised from the body of the victim, and Even if the Spirit Combat was violent the winner may not want 
forced to return to the Spirit World. to inflict any additional revenge: much depends on the type of spirit 

& Dissipated: Spirits with the Deadly ability (page 143) may to begin with. A peaceful mountain spirit may simply cast a foolish 
destroy the loser by tearing their essence apart. If the dis- animist back to the material world; a predator spirit may inflict a 
sipated spirit was a discorporated mortal, then the physical ritual scar that manifests on the loser’s material body, showing that 
body dies with the destruction of its soul. Some spirits can 
recover from being dissipated if they have the Recurring trait. ThHEe REeCcUuRrRrIinNgG TRrAaIiTt 

& Obligation: In exchange for its freedom, the loser must grant Normally spirits dissipated as a consequence of losing Spirit Combat 
one service to the victor. This is one of the more common are_forever destroyed, their essence recycling into the fabric of the Spurit 
outcomes of a combat, and forms the basis for animists com- Plane. Spirits possessing the Recurring trait are not eradicated. Although 
pelling spirits to do their bidding. ripped asunder their individual elements gradually reform, eventually 

& Expelled: If the loser is a discorporated soul, he may be restoring the original spirit no matter what 1s done lo it. 
ejected from the Spirit World. Such an involved process takes time. A dissipated spirit requires a 

& Ignored: If the loser poses no threat or interest to the victor, number of days equal to its Intensity to reform, plus whatever time s 
he may simply be ignored. Quite often a victorious spirit has required to recurperate its Magic Points. although in some settings the 
no ability to do anything else to a defeated opponent. period can ofien be longer. 

& Sundered: Limited to spirits with the Deadly ability (page Restored spirits retain their former knowledge, skills, and memory. 
143) such as death spirits. If the loser is a discorporated soul, T s often leads to them seeking revenge for their previous destruction — a 
he may be torn completely free of his material form, nor- dangerous situation for any amimist. The only ways to deal with such 
mally causing the death of the body but transfiguring the soul a spirit are to either imprison it in a_fetish where it can no longer cause 
into a spirit. What then happens to the sundered soul depends harm, or discover why it keeps recurring. Thus s normally due to some 
on the victorious spirit, and it may become one of its thralls enchantment or an unfinished task that must be completed before the spirit 
— perhaps exiled to the mundane world to bring fear to other will rest. 
mortals, or retained as a slave in the Spirit World. 

- 4 

138



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

he was bested; a curse spirit will likely be driven to possessing those it 
defeats; and a disease spirit is likely to infect the victim. Games Mas- 
ters must adjudicate the circumstances and repercussions according 
to the spirit’s inherent nature. 

MuuLTltiiPpLlEe OPpPpOoNnEeNnTtSs VvEeRrSsuUSs aA SIinNgGLlEe SPpIiRrIitT 
In certain circumstances a Spirit Combat might ensue where one 

side has a numerical advantage over the other. This may be a group 
of discorporated mortals facing a single spirit of high Intensity. Con- 
versely it could be an animist ambushed by multiple spirits of minor 
power. 

Whilst single combats between disproportionate foes may pose 
little threat to the more skilful practitioner, the situation can change 
if several lesser opponents gang up on a more powerful individual. 
The normal result of such a one-sided engagement is that the more 
numerous side is able to launch a number of unopposed attacks, 
which will begin to whittle down the overwhelmed defender. 

Attempting to flee multiple opponents requires that an ani- 
mist’s Opposed disengagement roll beats all of his foes, otherwise 
he remains trapped by their numbers. Conversely, if a member of 
the attacking pack decides to flee, then they get away automatically, 
provided at least one associate remains behind to cover their retreat. 

SPpIirrRiItT COoMmBbAaTt OPpTtIioONnSs 
Using Magic Points as spiritual Hit Points is the default method 

of measuring damage during Spirit Combat: it poses considerable 
problems if attacked victims have no magical reserves to prevent 
Spirit Combat, lessen its effects, or preserve/recover Magic Points 
quickly. In such situations any spirit or shaman could become by casting magic. Tenacity is independent of magical effort, provid- 
unstoppable. ing them with a level playing field when placed beside iron willed 

To overcome these circumstances, two alternate methods of run- warrior types. 
ning Spirit Combat are provided below. Modifying Spirit Combat to use Tenacity is a simple case of add- 

ing this as a new attribute to complement Magic Points. Tenacity 
TEeNnAaCcIiTtYy Points lost in Spirit Combat recover every 24 hours, provided the 

As well as storing or producing Magic Points, which are used character is sufficiently well rested on their native plane of existence. 
in the mundane world to fuel magic, POW also creates Tenacity 
Points, which measure a character’s resilience when in the Spirit PHhYySsIicCaALl DAaMmAaGgEe 
World. Tenacity Points are the focus of Spirit Damage, preserving Appropriate for nearly all Sword & Sorcery genres, this option is 
Magic Points solely for the use of magic, and ensuring that magi- the perfect replacement for personal Magic Points in worlds where 
cians defeated in Spirit Combat are stll capable of maintaining magic and violent sacrifice is rife. Nonetheless, it is best suited for 
their earthly magical powers afterwards. campaigns where Spirit Combat is only used to harm and destroy, 

Tenacity Points cannot be used to cast magic. They are only rather than for abstract challenges. 
tracked to judge the psychological endurance of those engaging in To avoid the difficulties that corporeal beings face in settings 
Spirit Combat. When reduced to zero the will to resist is broken, where they have no normal access to Magic Points, any damage they 
leaving the loser unable to avoid the consequences of the defeat. take in Spirit Combat is applied to their physical Hit Points instead 

Adding Tenacity Points has the advantage that all magicians, be of their soul. This approach has several distinctions. 
they theists, mystics or sorcerers, do not become spiritually weakened 

& Spirits can keep Magic Points as Hit Points since they lack a 
corporeal form. 

MEeNnTtAaLl REeSsIiLliIeEnNcCEe 
& All corporeal beings can take about the same amount of 

Tenacily has the additional benefit of becoming a_flexible measure of 
damage, regardless whether they are magic users or not. 

other mental states. If the campaign s of a kind where supernatural, and 
& Tnjuries suffered during Spirit Combat become more visceral 

alien horrors are capable of shredding thefrail sanaty of humanaty, Tenac- 
since damage is applied to locations. Although animists gain 

ity can be used lo track deteriorating mental states, with zero Tenacily 
an increase in effective ‘spiritual’ Hit Points, in fact characters 

points reflecting serious psychological damage, and the decline into insanity. 
become increasingly vulnerable to spiritual beings with large 

Simalarly Tenacity could be usedf or resisting corruption, experiencing 
Spirit Damage. 

battlefatigue, suffering addictions, facing supernaturalf orces in historical 
& To offset location vulnerability, Animists and sapient spir- 

settings, and so_forth. 
its possessing knowledge of armour can manifest psychic 

- 4 

139



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

protection with a value of one Armour Point per 20% of the 
Trance skill. 

Since spirit damage is applied directly to locational Hit Points, 
Serious and Major Wounds have duplicate physiological effects on 
an animist. On the Spirit Plane however, a serious wound prevents 
the victim from attacking for his next 1d3 Turns, whilst a major 
wound incapacitates, so that he immediately loses the Spirit Combat. 

Note that an animist can physically be killed by this type of com- 
bat even though something else might be happening to his soul. 

POossSsSeEsSsSiIoOnN aAnNDd EXxOoRrCcIisSmM 
Possession occurs when a spirit dominates the soul of a corporeal 

being, usually through a Spirit Combat defeat or the Possess Special 
Effect. The possessing entity inhabits the loser’s body, perhaps seiz- 
ing control of it. Possession comes in three forms: Dominant, Passive 

and Covert. 
A possessing spirit weaves itself into the victim, so that even if itis 

drawn forth to engage in spirit combat, part of it remains anchored 
to the host. No creature can ever purge itself of a possessing entity. 
Others must first defeat it in Spirit Combat, and then exorcise the 
spirit, or banish it by successfully casting a specific type of expulsion 
magic. If the original body of a mortal possessor has been killed 
in its absence, then its soul usually dies when it is exorcised. Spirits 
merely return to the Spirit World.. 

Needless to say, a possessing spirit or soul can willingly abandon 
a possession at any time. 

DOoMmIiNnAaNnTt POoSsSsEeSsSsiIoOnN at night when they are sleeping, thus keeping their existence secret, 

Dominant Possession occurs when the possessing spirit takes save for inevitable physical exhaustion, and odd fleeting nightmares. 

complete control of the body. The victim is fully aware that its body Detecting a covert possession requires a successful Opposed roll 

has been taken over but is absolutely powerless, unable to take any of the investigator’s Insight (if viewed magically) or Trance skill ver- 

action at all. The possessor does not have access to any of the mem- sus the spirit’s Stealth skill. 

ories, skills or magic of the possessed, but substitutes its own instead. 
To actively detect a dominant possession requires a successful, 

unopposed test of either Insight if viewed magically, or Trance. 
ANnIiMmIisSmM TRrIicCkKSs 

PAaSsSsIivVEe POoSsSsEeSsSsiIoOnN Animism provides a great deal of flexibility in mimicking most 

Passive Possession occurs when the spirit lodges itself within the historical or fantasy forms of animism, shamanism and totemism. 

victim, but is unable to seize control, allowing the host to remain in Yet there are a number of cunning tricks used in novels or recorded 

full command of its faculties. Instead the spirit ‘merely’ inflicts its in cultural mythology that Games Masters can use, or grant to spe- 

powers on the host’s body. cific cults as part of their secret teachings. 

COoVvEeRrTt POoSsSsEeSsSsiIoOnN REeJjuUVvEenNAaTtIinNgG SPpIiRrIitTSs 
As per Passive Possession, but the spirit remains hidden. The vic- As described in the Spiritual Attributes section, the Magic Points 

tim remains unaware of his possession, unless the spirit chooses to of a spirit only recover when it is in the Spirit World, since it is the 

inform him of its presence. Some spirits take over the victim’s body source which provides their magical life-force. Those spirits present 
in the material world, whether bound to a fetish or manifested via 
summoning, have no way of recovering their energy, and may even- 

DiiaBboouliic SPpIirIitTSs tually wither away depending on how badly they are treated. 

Inmany cultures spirits have long been thought of as demons or devils, In a similar way the souls of corporeal creatures cannot recover 

otherworldly beings who take control of the living to wreak havoc in the their Magic Points whilst present in the Spirit World, since their 

real world. With the wide range of abilities, and spirit types available, it magical strength comes from the physical world. 

would be easy for a Games Master to use animism to design fully fledged Animists whose spirits have been damaged by magical attacks or 

demonologists, perhaps even using Wraiths as a templatefor more material Spirit Combat may therefore have a difficult choice to make. Man- 

demons. The stereotypucal hierarchy of the underworld could easily be umitting a spirit from a fetish so it can return to the Spirit World 

replicated by assigning increasing Intensily lo hugher ranked fiends, with will allow it to recover its strength, but there is no guarantee it will 

Demon Lords possessing Intensity 6 or lugher. permit itself to be re-bound. Conversely failing to liberate a greatly 

. 4 weakened spirit is effectively condemning it to impotence, or even 

140



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

death: something the cult, tradition or donator of the spirit may 
frown upon. SPpIiRrIitTSs iInN DIiFfFfeErReEnNTt SEeTtTtIinNgGSs 

To overcome this, animists can ceremonially sacrifice their own 1In pseudo-historical settings the presence of a spirit, and its effects are 

Magic Points directly to the damaged spirit, restoring its essence. normally invisible to the naked eye. Clues can be given to their attendance 

This helps prevent a spirit from withering away, and has no detri- using other perceptions, skin breaking out in goosebumps or a faint moan- 

mental effect on the animist, who may regain donated Magic Points ing for example — but without some_form of magical detection, bound or 

normally through whichever methods are used in the campaign. summoned spirits cannot be targeted. 
In low fantasy settings the existence of a spirit can be more obvious. 

SPpIiRrIitT TRrAaPpSs T he immediate area around the spurit might take on certain visual cues, for 

A whole array of cunning traps can be prepared using spirits, instance hallucinatory morphing of objects seen out of the corner of the 

to guard a particular item or area. The classic method is to con- eye or an inexplicable deepening of shadows. To target such mangfestations 

struct a fetish from fragile material (or one that will be inadvertently without magical aid requires a successful Perception check in each round. 

destroyed as part of everyday use) thereby unbinding the spirit held In epuc fantasy settings the presence of manifested spirits s clearly 

within; such as a log hidden in a wood pile which will be burned for seen, and can be directly targeted. The source, and nature of the spir- 

heat, or a carefully inscribed mandala drawn into the sandy floor of uts durectly affects their appearance. A lotemuc shaman for instance may 

a cave. Breaking the fetish allows the spirit to escape; and woe betide appear to be guarded by a ghostly black wolf which eats any spell cast at 

those who are in the vicinity. Hostile entities like wraiths, curse or uts master; whilst a victim of a domanantly possessing sickness spirit may 

sickness spirits are preferred for such traps because, on release they appear to have his skin constantly erupting in weeping sores, and pustules. 

can engage tresspassers in Spirit Combat to take their revenge. The visibility of sperits in a campaign should be considered carefully, 
as it can set the tone of animast magic. Zero or low visibility makes tack- 

BIinNdDIinNgG Aa SoOUuLl iInNtToO aA LIivViInNgG CRrEeAaTtuURrEe ling animasts dangerous, but adds greatly to a feeling of suspicion, and 
Binding a soul of a sapient person into another living creature is Jear. Highly visible spirits arefar easer to defeat with magic, but provide 

a nefarious act reserved for those cults that revel in chaos and evil. a very dramatic impact. 
The host beast is usually something considered insulting or taboo, - 4 
and usually of little threat to the animist who performs the binding. 
Whether the original body of the victim is left to die from neglect transcendence to the source of all things or whatever afterlife is des- 

or is utilised in some other way depends on the objective of the ani- tined for them. 

mist. Some Bindings are simply temporary punishments designed In the Spirit World they cannot regain Magic Points, and it is 

to humiliate; the creator permitting the victim to return to his body only a matter of time before natural attrition from aggressive spir- 

after the lesson is learned. its finally dissipates their soul. To avoid this, most animists try to 
locate the nearest living creature they feel capable of discorporating, 

BOoDdYy SnNAaTtcChHIinNgG defeating in Spirit Combat, and possess it. This could be anything 

Body snatching takes the concept of soul binding one step fur- from a small animal to their own murderer. 

ther, using it for subversive purposes. A demon ruling a kingdom Once returned to a living body the shaman can recover Magic 

using the body of its monarch is a familiar trope of Sword & Sorcery Points normally. However the maximum number of Magic Points 

fantasy. the shaman can muster is limited by the Characteristic POW of the 

To body snatch the animist chooses a victim and, after defeating creature they now occupy. 

them in Spirit Combat, binds their soul into another creature. The Of course a shaman who persists in this semi-vampiric manner 

empty body that remains is then inhabited by the animist, who need is vulnerable to being exorcised. If this occurs it may result in the 

not worry about a potentially hostile soul co-habiting the physical shaman’s true death or force them to restart the cycle, depending on 

shell; nor about triggering the suspicion of anyone in search of pos- how they achieved their first self-~aware reincarnation. 

session regarding the snatched body via Trance or other magical Several options are: 

means.. 
& Knowledge of how to survive after death is inherent with gain- 

Body snatches are nearly impossible to detect, save for the 
ing the rank of High Shaman. Such animists must succeed in 

changed personality of the occupant. Physically the disguise is per- 
an Opposed test of their Trance skill against the Attack roll 

fect. The animist’s own body may be in some danger whilst he takes 
which killed them, or else be overwhelmed by the shock of 

command of another. In settings where fetches are unknown, the 
the blow, and unable to prevent their soul from transcending 

usual stereotype is that the spiritualist literally exchanges bodies with 
& The shaman must succeed in an unopposed Willpower test, 

the victim; so that a tenant remains who will, at the very least, feed 
but also needs to define what his objective for continued liv- 

his temporarily abandoned shell. 
ing will be. Once he has achieved this aim the shaman’s soul 

Of course if the animist’s original body dies he no longer has any 
continues to the afterlife. 

place to escape back to, causing his own death if somehow exorcised. 

SuURrVvIivVIinNgG aAFfTtEerR DEeAaTthH BIinNdDIinNgG HUuGgEe SPpIiRrIitTSs 
A technique passed down amongst a few highly skilled shamans As Spirit Combat suggests, larger spirits can be challenged by 

is the ability to survive after death. Since highly skilled animists have a group of animists acting in concert. Whilst fundamentally dan- 
rigid control over their own soul, they can hold themselves on the gerous (since individual animists could easily be slain with a single 
Spirit Plane for some specific purpose, effectively postponing their backlash) such efforts can be rewarded by overthrowing spirits of 

141



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

impressively large Intensity. The defeat of such spirits permits the All spirits are sentient, although the degree of sentience varies 
animists to bind, dissipate or extract a single service from the entity. according to the spirit’s representation and type. Ancestor spirits, for 

Binding the spirit can be a liability. Choosing to bind the spirit example, are fully sapient, and display all the intelligence and coher- 
within a fetish effectively imprisons it - a good thing if the spirit in ence of their mortal form; but nature spirits are likely to behave, 
question is malicious or destructive. On the other hand, the spirit’s perceive, and articulate themselves in ways that reflect their origin. 
POW may make it impossible to control by anyone calling it out of Skilled animists are capable of interpreting their (sometimes inco- 
the fetish. herent) ways of communicating, through their training and expo- 

Requesting a service from the spirit is also risky. Usually the boon sure to the Spirit World. 
is deferred to a later time, granting the spirit a chance to recover. 
Such requests are normally granted to the cult or tradition of those 

DEeSsIigGnNIinNgG SPpIiRrIitTSs 
that managed to defeat it, rather to a specific individual. However 

Most of the spirits listed in this chapter are starting examples of 
this does permit any member of that cult who knows of the bargain 

a vast range of possibilities. To create new and unique spirits, use the 
and the name of the entity to call upon the owed debt. 

following guidelines: 

& Fach type of spirit possesses one or more abilities which 

SPpIirRIitT TYyPpEeSs encompas their powers. Not all spirits are designed to grant 
an advantage to an animist, some are intended only as chal- 

Spirits come in many forms, ranging from minor nature spirits lenges for characters to defeat. 
through to powerful kami of major environmental forces, beyond & Any advantage a spirit might offer when bound should be 
mortal control; mischievous ghosts through to dreadful undead capable of being sustained as a permanent effect. The advan- 
manifestations. tage should also be roughly balanced according to other com- 

Although spirits are living entities rather than mechanistic spells, parable spirits, and the other forms of higher magic (mysti- 
they still have specific sources or powers to which they are associated. cism, theism and sorcery). 

& A spirit can be an incarnation of an abstract magical or nat- & An advantage is always proportional to a spirit’s Intensity. 

ural effect Since spirits usually have no defined limit to their POW, spir- 

& A spirit can be the individual or collective essence of a species its often come in weaker and stronger forms. 

of plant or animal & All spirits possess certain default skills, Spirits start with a 

& A spirit can be the venerated soul of a dead ancestor Spectral Combat skill equal to 50%+POW+CHA, and a 

& A spirit can be the vengeful remnant of a dead creature Willpower of 50%+POWx2). 

APpPpLlYyIinNgG SPpIirRIitT POoWwEeRrSs 
SPpIirRIitT ABbILilIiTtIieESs 

Animasts can use a spurit’s powers mn three ways; Augmentation, 
Several of the following abilities rely on the spirit first infesting 

Embodiment, Abdication, and Discorporation. 
the target, in the form of either dominant, passive or covert posses- 

Augmentation: The simplest, and safest spurits are Nature, and 
sion. This requires that the victim is beaten in Spirit Combat as per 

Guardian spirits who augment the animist. The spirit gives the prac- 
Consequences of Defeat (page 138) or it gains the Possess Special 

titioner a benefit by flowing through or around his body, and is easily 
Effect. 

returned to a fetish. An animist who walks through someform of magical 
anti-sprrit barrer will strp his augmenting spirits away i it powerful 

ANnIiMmAaTtEe (SpPEeCcIiFfIicC SUuBbSsTtaANnCcEe)) 
enough to affect them. 

The spirit can embody itself into non-living matter, allowing it to 
Embodiment: This is the active task of assimilating a spirit’s 

shape or move the substance as if an actual body. If the material is a 
powers, and advantages into the animust’s physical being, directly channel- 

pure element such as earth or fire, the spirit may manifest itself phys- 
ling, and becoming one with the spirit. Elemental or Shape-shifiing spurits 

ically as per an Elemental with a size in cubic metres equal to twice 
work in this way. Embodiment can be risky, and demanding: a weak 

its Intensity (page 242). If, on the other hand, the material is flesh of 
animist who cautiusly embodies such a spirit risks being consumed or 

a dead creature, it instead provides the powers of an Undeath spirit 
entrapped by it. Whilst embodying a spurit, the animust is unable to phys- 

granting bonuses to physical Characteristics (page 153). 
wally cross anti-sparit barriers that are strong enough to stop a spurit of 
that Intensiy. AUuTtoOnNoOMmYy 

Abdication: Tlus is where an animust surrenders control of s body Spirit has the ability to venture beyond the normal distance limits 
by willingly letting humself be possessed. Thus normally applies to ances- of a binding or its summoner’s aura of influence. This allows the 
lor spurits that possess the animast, taking complete command. However spirit to act as an independent scout or messenger. 
other spirits, espectally those of great power or authority, might demand 
use of the animust’s body in exchangefor performing a service. Should an BLlEess 
ancestor or great spirit not wish to depart, there is little the unfortunate The spirit can boost one Attribute or Skill of whomever controls 
practitioner can do. As with embodiment, Animism-suppressing or -coun- it. The amount increased depends on the Intensity of the spirit, and 
tering magics will pose a physical barrier to a possessed animast. the specific type of blessing (see Curse Spirit Effects table for associ- 

ated costs), but no Attribute or Skill may be boosted beyond double 
< 4 its original value. 

142



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

CAaNnNnIBibAaLIliSsTtIicC their Damage Modifier, or alternately cursed with clumsiness in war 

The spirit gains the ability to regenerate its own Magic Points by by using a spirit which reduces one of the victim’s combat styles. 

absorbing the essence of spirits it battles in Spirit Combat. Every 
successful attack the spirit makes transfers that many Magic Points DeeAaDdLlYy 

to its own total. If this exceeds the spirit’s own POW, any surplus Gains the ability to either Dissipate or Sunder a spirit it has 

energy is wasted. beaten in Spirit Combat (page 137). A spirit may only have the abil- 
ity to inflict one or the other, not both. 

COoMmPpRrEeHhEeNnSsIioOnN 
Grants the ability to understand and speak with creatures asso- DEeMmEeSsNnEe 

ciated with that spirit or its animal totem. For example, a wolf spirit A potent ability, the spirit gains dominion over aspects of its envi- 

would allow its user to speak with wolves. ronment within a range of one hundred times its POW in metres. 
Normally the limits of its influence are specified in the spirit’s 

COoNnJjUuGgAaTtEe description. For example, a plant spirit could control the growth, 

Spirit can maintain a permanent mental link with an animist flowering and fruiting of vegetation within its area of effect, whilst a 

who summons or binds it, no matter the distance between the two or truth spirit might prevent falsehoods being uttered. If the demesne 

seperation if one or other is within the Spirit World. of the spirit is challenged by a character, they may attempt to over- 
come its power by winning an opposed roll of relevant skills. For 

COoVvEeRrTt example, to lie within the demesne of the truth spirit would require 
The spirit has a Stealth skill at 50%+INT+CHA, with which it opposing the spirit’s Willpower with the character’s Deceit skill. 

can hide from active magical or spiritual observation by opposing 
the Perception skill of the observer. D1iSscCoORrPpOoRrAaTtEe 

Assuming the spirit is not bound, it may drag the soul of a mortal 
CUuRrSsEe from their body into the Spirit World. The spirit has a base Dis- 

The spirit can lower one Attribute or Skill of a victim it passively corporate skill of 50%+POW+INT. An unwilling target may resist 
or covertly possesses. The amount reduced depends on the Intensity the attempt in an opposed roll of their Willpower versus the spirit’s 
of the spirit and the specific type of curse. For example, a victim Discorporate skill. If they succeed, they cannot be affected by the 
could be cursed with weakness if possessed by a spirit which reduces discorporation ability of that spirit again, until a full day has passed. 

DiiseAase 
The spirit carries one or more diseases. Instead of possessing a 

CUuRrSsEe SPpIiRrIitT EFfFfEeCcTtSs 
victim, it instead infects them via Spirit Combat, providing it suc- 

Curse Type Effect Notes 
ceeds in an attack, and gains one or more levels of success over the 

1 per three full A possessed victim can be rendered 
Action Points foe. Once infected, the victim must roll against their Endurance skill 

points of Intensity helpless if reduced to zero Action Points 
to determine the severity of the disease, suffering a reduction if the 

1 per point of Only reduces natural armour, not worn 
Armour Points spirit’s Willpower skill is higher, and over 100%. 

Intensity armour 
Depending on the result of the Endurance roll, the severity is as 

1 step per point of This can reduce a Damage Modifier to 
Damage Modifier follows: 

Intensity negative values 

Experience 1 per two full If lowered to zero, the victim can no & Critical: severity is Chronic, effect occurs each week. 

Modifier points of Intensity longer improve their skills & Success: severity is Acute, effect occurs each day. 

A possessed character reduced to zero & Tailure: severity is Terminal, effect occurs each hour, 
1 per two full 

Healing Rate can no longer heal naturally, and must & Fumble: victim is possessed by the spirit, and becomes an 
points of Intensity 

rely on magic instead asymptomatic carrier of the disease, inadvertently infecting 

1 per point of If a Hit Location is reduced to zero, it is others with whom they come into physical contact. 
Hit Points 

Intensity treated as if suffering a Serious Wound 
An imparted disease endures until the sickness is cured magically. 

1 per two full 
Luck Points Bad luck! The type of condition (page 75) is limited by the Intensity of the car- 

points of Intensity 
rying spirit. Nothing prevents a spirit carrying a combination of dis- 

1 per point of If reduced to zero the possessed 
Movement Rate ease conditions, save that the total Intensity cost cannot exceed that 

Intensity character can barely crawl 
of the spirit. For instance an Intensity 3 sickness spirit could carry 

2 per point of Strike Rank can be reduced to negative 
Strike Rank Bleeding disease, or a combination of Blindness and Fever instead. 

Intensity values 

1 Difficulty Grade The affected skill can be rendered « Intensity 1: Confusion, Contagious, Exhaustion, Fever, Hallu- 

Skill per two full points unusable if the Difficulty Grade reaches cination, Nausea, Sapping 

of Intensity Hopeless & Intensity 2: Blindness, Deafness, Dumbness, Maiming, 
Mania, Weakness 

& Intensity 3: Agony, Bleeding, Paralysis, Unconsciousness 
& Intensity 4: Asphyxiation, Death 

If the spirit has more than one condition, they trigger in cascad- 
ing sequence in assending order of required Intensity. Thus a victim 

143



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

of the previously described Intensity 3 spirit would suffer fever the minimum Intensity of spirit required to inflict that state of mind, 
first time the disease takes effect, then fever and blindness the sec- assuming it manages to possess the target. 
ond, after which (since the blindness might be permanent) the victim Ammnesia Spirits (1): An amnesia spirit makes the victim chron- 
will suffer fever each occurance thereafter. ically forgetful. Although it has no effect on skills, it does prevent 

them from remembering anything that happens during the period 
DOoMmIiNnAaTtIioOnN (SpPEeCcIiFfIicC SPpEeCcIiEeSs) of their possession. This doesn’t stop the host from behaving nor- 

Allows totemic spirits to command all living animals related to mally (assuming they do not act on knowledge revealed since the 
it within a distance equal to its POW in metres. A serpent spirit for amnesia started), only that they have no recollection of it, even after 
example could dominate all snakes within range. the spirit is expelled. 

Confusion Spirits (2): Causes confusion during times of stress, 
EnNdDoOWwMmEeNnTt (SpPEeCcIiFfIicC CAaPpAaBbILilIiTtYy) or at the malicious whim of the possessing spirit. During a confusion 

The spirit grants the magician a special capability, sense, move- attack, any skill attempt made by the host is resisted by spirit’s Will- 
ment or resistance as owned by the spirit’s totem. Usually these take power in an opposed test. If the victim loses, they do the incorrect 
the form of a Creature Ability (page 214), or combat Special Effect. 

thing, possibly striking the wrong target in combat, casting a differ- 
The minimum required spirit Intensity varies, depending on the 

ent spell to what was intended, answering a question which wasn’t 
capability endowed, and nature of the spirit cult. 

asked, and so on. 
Deceit Spirits (1): Induces the possessed victim to lie, cheat 

ETteErRnNAaLl 
and steal, no matter the consequences. They simply cannot help 

The spirit has Recurring trait (page 138), which enables it to 
themselves, although they can attempt to disguise their subterfuge 

return after being dissipated. 
through use of the Deceit and Conceal skills. 

Fear Spirits (2): The possessed host suffers foreboding and 
GLlaAmMOoUuRr 

Enables the spirit to create illusions within a range equal to its timidity, as if they were under the effect of the Demoralise spell 

POW in metres. This glamour is a mental illusion that works in a (page 125). The subject of the fear must be related to the cult or 

similar way to the sorcery spell Phantom (Sense) (page 171). The tradition, thus a sea based spirit could inflict a fear of drowning, 

spirit can affect one sense per level of its Intensity, with a Magnitude and so on. 

of twice that. Greed Spirits (1): Also known as Gluttony Spirits, possession 
causes the host to become enamoured of a specific item, substance 

HEeAaLlIinNgG or stimulus. Whenever the victim comes into contact with the object 

The spirit is able to cure the effects of disease, if its Intensity is of their greed, they will attempt to horde, secrete, covert, consume 

sufficient to counter the condition (see Disease Ability, page 143). or immerse themselves to their detriment for the next 1d3 hours. 

It also permits recovery of Minor, Serious and Major Wounds Examples might be alcohol, gold, or even sexual liaison. 

(although they are unable to replace lost limbs), by sacrificing 1 Grief Spirits (3): Instils a sense of loss so great that the host 

Magic Point per Hit Point healed. becomes passively suicidal. They do not actively seek dangerous sit- 
uations, but will only half-heartedly protect themselves if one occurs. 

MAaNnAa Whenever asked to parry, evade or make an opposed test, to resist 
Permits the spirit to donate its Magic Points to the summoner hostile magic for instance, the victim must reverse the number rolled 

or holder of its fetish, for use in casting magic or aiding in Spirit on the dice if it would generate a worse result. 
Combat. Hate Spirits (2): These spirits exaggerate the possessed host’s 

natural inclinations towards a particular individual, race, cult or cul- 
MAaNnIFifEeSsTtAaTtIioOnN ture, making them irritable and surly. Whenever the opportunity 

Spirit may move between the mundane and Spirit World at will. presents itself, usually when unobserved, the victim will succumb to 
It takes one Action to shift from one to the other. Whilst in the Spirit overwhelming hatred; leading them to quarrel with, brutalise, tor- 
World the spirit is immune from all attacks (magical or physical) ture, or rarely to even murder the object of their hate. 
from corporal opponents. Love Spirits (1): The newly possessed host falls in love with the 

first compatible partner he or she sees. Once a love object is found, 
MiiAasmMAa 

the host is utterly infatuated, gaining a Love (Individual) Passion 
Enables the spirit to induce feelings of despair, dread and horror 

equal to the Willpower value of the spirit. This is thereafter used 
within a radius of its POW in metres. The Magnitude of the effect 

as an opposing motivation whenever the host is called to leave their 
is equal to twice the spirit’s Intensity. Anyone unable to block the 

beloved, or work against his or her interests. 
magic must succeed in an opposed test of Willpower skills, or else 

Madness Spirits (2): Akin to having a demon whispering into 
flee the area in abject terror. 

your ear, madness spirits force the host — at times of stress — into 
acts of irrational or gibbering behaviour. Depending on the spirit’s 

PassioonN (SpeciiFfic EmMOoTtIioOnN oORr DIiSsoORrDdEeRr)) 
inclination, this is done by changing the perceptions of the victim, 

The spirit can invoke an overwhelmingly strong passion or state 
sadistically torturing them, or instilling a degree of increasing para- 

of mind in those it possesses. Although in a few cases they can be 
noia. Madness attacks last 1d3x10 minutes, occurring whenever a 

used beneficently, most are used in a hostile manner. The follow- 
skill check is made by the host, and the spirit overcomes that roll in 

ing passions and mental disorders provide mechanical effects of 
an opposed test using its Willpower. 

how they should be used in play. As with the Disease Ability (page 
143), each has an associated number in parentheses, showing the 

144



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

Violence Spirits (3): Removes all ethical and moral restraints TEeLlEeKkIiNnEeSsIiSs 
towards using combat to solve problems. Any hint of dissent or out- This ability grants the spirit the ability to move objects in the 
right threat will trigger a violent outburst. Worse still, the host glories physical world despite its nominally intangible form. It gains a STR 
in violence so much that they will joyously brutalise all living things equal to its Intensity, and can shift items up to its POW in metres 
within reach, be they friend, foe or even innocents. Violent outbursts distant. 
can be resisted if the host can overcome the spirit in an opposed 
test of Willpower, but once triggered, the violence only stops when WAaRrDdIinNGg 
the host is incapacitated by exhaustion or a lack of responding vic- Gains the ability to ward off hostile magic from something 

tims. Note that violence does not necessarily equate to death — most the spirit guards, automatically blocking spells with a Magnitude 

hosts utilising their natural weapons over drawing a weapon, unless less than or equal to twice the spirit’s Intensity. Although magic is 

directly threatened by one first. blocked, it is not dismissed by contact with the spirit. For instance, 
weapon enhancement spells do not vanish when the magician is hit, 

PEeRrCcEePpTtIivVEe nor is the enchanted weapon prevented from striking them; only that 
Spirit has the ability to see possessing spirits, bound spirits inside any magical boosting to damage does not occur. 

creatures and fetishes, shapeshifted beings, and penetrate illusions 
in its immediate vicinity. The spirit has a base Perceive Unseen skill WIiTtHhEeRr 
of 50%+POW+INT which can be countered by the target of its The spirit is able to physically damage corporeal beings, using 

scrutiny with an opposed test against Conceal, Disguise, Stealth, or its Spectral Combat skill or some other Combat Style it possessed 

a pertinent magical skill. before death. The blows inflicts damage equal to its usual Spirit 
Damage that ignores all non-magical parries and physical armour; 

PEeRrSsIisStTeEnNtT requiring opponents to Evade or flee its attacks. 
The spirit gains immunity to magical dismissal of any form. This 

does not mean it is immune to magical damage or Spirit Combat, 
EXxAaMmPpLlEe SPpIiRrIitTSs 

only that spells such as Banish or Exorcism do not affect it. 
The following spirits are presented with base Characteristic 

PUuPpPpEeTtEeEerR ranges and skills. However since the POW of the spirit depends on 

The possessing spirit can control the physical body of others. the Intensity chosen for it (see Defining Spirits page 132), no average 

It can be used benevolently to take control of a totem animal or Attributes are provided as they fluctuate according to the POW of 

protect a spirit magician’s body whilst he is discorporate. Hostile the spirit. 

spirits on the other hand, use this ability to steal the body of a foe to Nothing prevents a Games Master from adding or removing 

achieve the spirit’s strongest desires. abilities from the following spirits to create unique entities more 
suited to their campaign settings. 

SaAGgAaCcIiTtYy 
Possesses a skill at a value equal to the spirit’s 100% + (INTx2). ANnCcEeSsTtoORr SPpIiRrIitTSs 

There is no limit to the type of skill imparted, provided it is rele- Eternal, plus one or more of Discorporate, Sagactty, Spellcasting, and 

vant to the spirit concerned. So a spirit devoted to war might know Subjugate 

weapon skills, whereas one linked to a particular family may provide Ancestor spirits are the souls of family members who, after 

genealogical knowledge instead. death, reside either in the Spirit World, in the underworld or what- 
ever afterlife is provided by the local pantheon; all depending on the 

ShHAaPpeEcChHaAnNGgEe (SpPEeCcIiFfIicC SPpEeCcIiEeSs) setting. An animist who quests in the Spirit World can always find 

Grants the ability to shape change the spirit magician into his a way to reach these places, although he will normally only ever 

cult’s totem animal, as described under Shape-shifting spirits (page encounter ancestors with whom he has a relationship, finding both 

152). venerated predecessors and despised enemies. Such spirits can be 
found continuing their existence in houses, halls, tribes or commu- 

SPpEeLllLcCaASstTiInNgG nities resembling those they occupied before death; or despondently 
Allows the spirit to either cast magic on behalf of its summoner wandering in the gloom of limbo. 

with a skill of 50%+POW+CHA, or share knowledge of the spells Animists may ask questions or request aid from their honoured 
it knows with the holder of its fetish. ancestors; or conversely attempt to bind and imprison an enemy 

ancestor, preventing it from being called upon by their foes. 
SuUBbJjuUgGAaTtEe Ancestor spirits are a natural source of knowledge and informa- 

Allows the spirit the ability to bind one or more other spirits of tion. In their mortal life they achieved greatness through skills, tal- 
lesser Intensity, holding them as vassals without the necessity of a ents, and deeds that have secured their continued veneration in the 
fetish. Tor spirits of the same tradition, this is usually a willing servi- afterlife. The spirits of those who died without noteworthy deeds 
tude — a mountain spirit holding several lesser earth elemental spir- tend to fade and dissipate, once their immediate descendants pass 
its, for instance. If the spirits are not associated, the subjugation is on. Thus most ancestor spirits are noted heroes, remembered many 
more one of forced enslavement. Each lesser spirit held in subjuga- generations after their death, and continually honoured in ceremo- 
tion reduces the holding spirit’s Magic Points by a value equal to its nies personal and grand, small and large. 
Intensity as an enduring cost. Subjugation ends if the holding spirit A specific ancestor spirit is summoned to the material world by 
is ever reduced to zero Magic Points. an animist of direct descent. If there is no blood-lineage, a shaman 

145



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

CURSE SPIRIT FLEMENTAL 
PI{EDATOI{_"}

PIR}_T 

wwem ATT L 

must travel to the home of the ancestor in its afterlife. Once sum- time for it to emerge. Such confinement is extremely unpleasant for 
moned or located, the spirit can be asked questions concerning the the ancestor spirit, and so the expectation is that it last for a very 
family line, or events which happened during its lifetime. Such short time — days rather than weeks or months. Any longer, and the 
requests only require a successful Influence roll, the offering of 1 ancestor may turn hostile and immediately return to the Spirit Plane 
Magic Point — representing a donation of blood or life-force— and upon release, after extracting suitable penance from the summoner. 
cost nothing further. Physically incarnating requires the descendent to voluntarily 

Animists can also request an ancestor’s aid in performing a spe- permit the ancestor spirit to possess his body. This bargain places 
cific and important service. This comes at a greater cost, involving the animist at a dangerous disadvantage since he cannot prevent 
an immediate sacrifice of at least 1 Magic Point per Intensity of the his body from being abused by the ancestor spirit. Unsympathetic 
ancestor, and continued votive gifts to that particular spirit (if nec- ancestors often succumb to long forgotten passions, or attempt 
essary this can be abstracted to either spending an Experience Roll extreme acts to further their renown — being in little danger of per- 
cach year or one Magic Point each month, if Games Masters prefer). sonal harm if their host dies. 
Continued veneration in this way keeps the memory of the ances- Whilst possessed, the animist may gain access to new abilities, 
tor alive, promoting his continued existence. In return the ancestor spells, and spirits pertaining to the ancestor. Warrior ancestors have 
grants its help to overcome the problem facing the petitioner. combat skills, shaman ancestors have spirit skills, hunter ancestors 

Ancestor spirits are very versatile, and may either agree to per- have stealth and tracking skills, medicine ancestors have healing 
form a single service as a spirit there and then, or offer to incarnate skills, and so on. 
in the body of the descendent if this is a more appropriate act. Residing in another body or object means that an ancestor spirit 

Certain ancestors might be prepared to temporarily inhabit an cannot be called upon by other members of that cult or tradition; 
heirloom or item (such as a tribal treasure) of great personal signif- for this reason an ancestor spirit usually only remains until it has 
icance in order to be manifested later. The item can be anything achieved the summoning objective. Regardless of how the ancestor 
held in esteem by the community, and the ancestor will bind itself to is incarnated or lodged, it counts against the animist’s number of 
the item as if it were a fetish, and wait within until the appropriate spirits that can be controlled. 

146



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

SPpIiRrIitTSs THhAaTt InNIitTiIaAtTeE COoMmBbAaTt QUuEeSsTtIioONnIinNgG ANnCcEeSsTtOoRrSs 
Although all sprits have a Spectral Combat skill, it does not mean Some animist traditions requare the ancestor to inhabit the body of its 

that an animast can send any old spirit off to engage a mortal in Spirit summoner in the material world, so that it can communicate directly with 
Combat. Spirits are not ubiquitous fire-and-forget weapons to destroy an those who question it; rather than indirectly via a go-between. In settings 
enemy’s Magic Points. Rather they have a specific purpose, and alternate where this is the norm, an animist must always voluntarily permut the 
abilities to back it up. ancestor to possess them unless the animust has travelled into the Sperit 

The important term here is initiate. Whilst a spirit can always Plane to question the spirit in its home in the afterlife. Where an animist 
Jight back when attacked, most cannot start a Spirit Combat except against has abdicated control of hus body, the ancestor will usually respect the 
particularf oes. trust of the summonen; and leave of its own_free will once it has satisfied 

Each of the common spirit types mentioned in this chapler has a all enquaries. 
defined limut clarifying i, and what types of target, that spirit can initiate 
Spirit Combat with. ANnCcEeSsTtRrAaLl DEeMmIiGgOoDdSs 

Savef or a handful of cases (Ancestor;, Curse, Death or Sickness spirits When a soulf urst departsfor the aflerlife, it becomes a spurit of equal 

Jor example) none of  the described spirits can be used to aggressively insti- POW 1o its lwing self. However; over time those ancestral spirits which 

gale an attack against mortals in Spirit Combat. recewe regular worshipy, and propitiation slowly grow in strength. 1t may 
take centuries, but ultimately the spurit will transcend their normal species 

A\ 3 bmit to characteristic POW. In this way the spirits of tribal_founders, 
national heroes or even assuaged enemies can eventually become demigods 

Repeated summonings or being summoned for minor or trivial wn thewr own right. 
tasks may irritate the spirit, forcing the animist to defeat his ances- - 4 
tor in mock Spirit Combat. If the animist loses, then the ancestor 
considers the request below its dignity and refuses to help. If the Bane spirits are abhorred to the point that they are often bound 
animist wins instead, the ancestor is roused into providing aid, but and imprisoned in remote or accursed locations, preventing them 
the ancestor may be considered as either neutral or hostile. from causing irreparable harm. Only the insane, or those driven to 

suicidal revenge, tend to use them. If imbued into a fetish, bane spir- 
ANnCcEeSsTtoORr SPpIiRrIitT its can be used as a weapon nominally sent against other spirits to 

Characteristics engage in Spirit Combat. Bane spirits can destroy other bane spirits. 

INT: As per mortal of the species The majority of bane spirits are oblivious to the physical world, 

POW: As per its Intensity and lack the ability to manifest into the material realm to attack 
mortals. Instead they fester upon the Spirit World causing untold 

CHA: As per mortal of the species 
damage to other spirits which mistakenly stray into their vicinity. 

Skills: 

Culture and Lore skills of their people and region = 100%+(INTx2), 
BAaNnEe SPpIiRrIitT 

Spectral Combat = 50%+POW+CHA, 
Characteristics 

Willpower of 50%+POWx2) 
INS: 1d6 

In addition, the ancestor may take a number of selections, equal to 1d3+Intensity, POW: As per Intensity 

from the following list of Spirit Abilities: CHA: 1d6 

Skills: 
& Discorporate: allows the ancestor to summon the soul of a 

Spectral Combat = 50%+POW+CHA, 
nearby mortal descendent into the Spirit World. 

Willpower of 50%+POWx2) 
& Sagacity: spirit knows a skill relevant to the profession of the 

ancestor at 100%+(INTx2). 
CUuRrSsEe SPpIiRrIitTSs 

& Spellcasting: holds knowledge of 1d3 Folk Magic spells (which 
Curse, Covert, Manfestation 

it can cast assuming the ancestor has the Folk Magic skill). Overtly malicious, curse spirits are sent by animists to possess 
& Subjugate: ancestor has a spirit ally of one less Intensity than mortals bringing them misfortune. They can be found in places that 

itself, which appears within 1d3 Combat Rounds of being 
have suffered terrible natural disasters. 

summoned (assuming the ancestor has the Trance and Bind- Clurse spirits impose detrimental effects such as reduce Action 
ing skills). Points, slow Healing Rate, and so on. The conditions they inflict 

directly affect the possessed victim, and can only be stopped by exor- 

BAaNnEe SPpIiRrIitTSs cising the spirit, assuming the victim is even aware that he is pos- 

Canmibalistic, Deadly sessed in the first place. 

Fragments of pure Chaos or some other source of evil, bane 
spirits strive to absorb the essence of other spirits. Due to their rela- CUuRrSsEe SPpIiRrIitT 
tionship with entropy, once the Magic Points of the targeted spirit 
have been reduced to zero, the bane spirit consumes it utterly and INS: 2d6 

irrevocably, so that it is forever destroyed, even those with the Recur- POW: As per Intensity 

ring trait. CHA: 2d6 

147



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

Skills: able to sink into the ground as if some sort of amorphous creature 

Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, of flowing sand. 

Stealth = 50%+INS+CHA, Whilst embodying an elemental spirit, the Animist is physically 

Willpower = 50%+POWx2) immune to the elemental’s incidental effects himself, but cannot 
control their affect on his belongings or companions. So an embod- 

DEeAaTthH SPpIiRrIitTSs ied Salamander will burn away the animist’s clothes, consume his 
Deadly, Manifestation equipment, and potentially injure any nearby friends from radiated 
These spirits are viewed in different ways by different cultures. heat. Furthermore, expelling the elemental spirit is more difficult 

Some see dying as a natural part of the cycle of existence, and there- than for other spirits, as the animist must make a successful Trance 
fore nothing to be feared. Others are horrified by death spirits, see- roll to successfully force it back into the fetish, each attempt costing 
ing them as the tools of depraved animists to spread terror. The spir- an additional Magic Point. Finally, while in his elemental form, the 
it’s appearance reflects the attitude of the cult or tradition; peaceful animist is vulnerable to additional damage from an opposing ele- 
bringers of death taking the form of serene angels to guide the vic- ment. For all these reasons, embodying a powerful elemental spirit is 
tim to the afterlife, whereas murderous slayers might appear as such a step that is never undertaken lightly. 
things like burning skulls, giant poisonous animals or hooded, scythe Animists embodying an elemental spirit gain the abilities of an 
wielding vultures. elemental of a size based on the spirit’s Intensity as outlined below. 

Death spirits are sometimes bound to protect places and objects, 
or more often summoned to attack specific targets, attacking the ELleEmMEeNnTtAaLl InNTtEeNnSsIiTtYy/S1izZEe REeLlAaTtIioONnSsHhIiPp 

transgressor in Spirit Combat either way. If the spirit wins the bat- 
fft’::;w Elemental Size 

tle it Sunders the soul of the victim, ripping it free of its corporeal 
body, and sending it to whatever fate lies in store. This is invariably 1 2 cubic metres 

fatal for mortal creatures but preserves their essence and identity as 2 4 cubic metres 
a spirit. 

3 6 cubic metres 

4 8 cubic metres 
DEeaAtThH SPpIiRrIitT 

5 10 cubic metres 
Characteristics 

+1 +2 cubic metres, and so on 
INS: 3d6 

POW: As per Intensity 
The animist’s STR, DEX and Hit Points are replaced by the 

CHA: 3d6 spirit’s values (which are rolled as normal for an elemental of its 
Skills: SIZ when first encountered). This normally calls for an adjustment 
Spectral Combat = 50%+POW+CHA, of derived Attributes such as Combat Actions, Damage Modifier 
Willpower = 50%+POWx2) and Initiative Bonus. Any special attack the elemental possesses is 

retained but uses the animist’s Unarmed skill value instead. 
ELleEmMEeNnTtAaLl SPpIiRrIitTSs 

When the elemental spirit is expelled, any damage it sustained 
Animate, Demesne 

whilst embodied is divided evenly between all the animist’s Hit 
Elemental spirits are direct incarnations of the elements (earth, 

Locations (rounding up as usual). For example if a human shaman 
air, fire, water and darkness) or manifestations of natural forces and 

took 23 points of damage while in elemental form then he would 
phenomenon: mountains, volcanoes, tsunami, and so on. 

take 4 points of damage to each of his 7 locations once he returned 
Animists can bind elemental spirits in the normal manner but the 

to his normal form. If the damage is enough to cause a Serious 
object or location must be chosen carefully because, even within the 

Wound the animist must resist the injury effects by succeeding in a 
binding, some of the elemental spirit’s power is always manifested. A 

Hard Endurance roll, or a Formidable Endurance roll if a Major 
Salamander spirit must be bound into a fetish capable of withstand- 

Wound. The result of the roll is applied to all the critically injured 
ing heat while an Undine fetish will become damp and clammy. 

locations simultaneously. 
When summoned or released from a fetish an elemental spirit, if 

Although embodying an elemental spirit can be extremely 
left uncontrolled, will gravitate to the nearest source of its element 

impressive, it also opens the practitioner up to new problems. An 
within range. By itself it is just a spirit, and has no significant effect 

animist embodying an elemental spirit will take double damage from 
on the mundane plane. The spirit’s power does not truly manifest 

attacks using the opposing element, and can be instantly dispersed 
until commanded to embody itself. As with any control attempt, the 

by contact with an opposing elemental of the same size or bigger in 
animist must spend 1 Magic Point. If the roll is successful, the ani- 

cubic metres. Reducing the elemental form to 0 Hit Points instantly 
mist has two choices: Permitting the spirit to animate a suitable vol- 

breaks the binding and frees the spirit, possibly also critically injur- 
ume of its native material, as per a normal elemental, or, embodying 

ing or killing the magician in the process. Spells which can dismiss 
the elemental so that it manifests within his own body. 

elementals will free the elemental, and destroy the binding if the 
The later choice grants the animist the physical and magical ben- 

Magnitude of the magic is equal or greater than twice the spirit’s 
efits of an elemental. Thus an animist embodying a sylph would be 

Intensity. 
surrounded by a vortex of buffeting winds, but could fly and send 

Elemental spirits do not initiate Spirit Combat except against 
out jets of wind to pummel opponents. If a gnome was embodied 

other elemental spirits of an opposite element. 
instead, the animist would take on a gravelly appearance, and be 

148



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

FeEtTcChHEeSs 
QUuEeSsTtIinNgG fFoORr aA FeEtTcChH 

Special 
Questingf or a fetch is a dangerous ritual, and if itfails it may cripple 

A fetch is a shaman’s spiritual ally, representing the opening of 
or kill the shaman. No mechanics are suggested to abstract this process 

his consciousness in the Spirit World. Not every Shamanic tradition 
since such an epic undertaking should be played out in theform of a highly 

features fetches, and those that do vary in the nature of the fetch. 
challenging scenaro. 

In some traditions the fetch is the awakened “other half” of the 
Quests usually tnvolve the re-enactment of a cult's mythicfoundation 

shaman. In this case the fetch and shaman are two sides of the same 
lo locate or awaken the shaman’s fetch, and culminate in a dangerous 

soul with the fetch perceiving and travelling the Spirit World whilst 
battle against the traditional enemy of hus tradition. The quest includes 

the shaman exists on the mundane plane. 
moral ordeals involving both the shaman’s community, and his treatment 

In other traditions the fetch is a totemic spirit who is drawn to 
of spirits, the correct solutions being those endorsed, and taught by his 

the shaman to become his spiritual guide. In both cases the shaman 
cult. Trials of skill, cunning, and magical strength are also common, 

must undertake a successful quest in order to gain his fetch. 
the opponents the shaman_faces being the friendly, and neutral spirits of 

A fetch’s abilities vary widely between traditions. In cases where 
hus own tradition. The quest helps the shaman remforce hus relationships 

the fetch is the shaman’s counterpart, it represents the opening of 
with the spirit world, and he can use these bonds to aid in the climactic 

spiritual abilities to the shaman rather than being an independent 
confrontation. 

being in its own right. The fetch might provide the shaman with 
Failing in the final battle usually results in dissipation of the sha- 

exotic powers, such as the ability to shapechange. If the fetch is an 
man’s soul. Few tears are shed at such an occurrence as it generally indi- 

animal or ancestor guide then the shaman may gain the ability to 
cates that the candidate was not in sympathy with the ideas of the spurit 

communicate with the animals of the fetch’s species, control them 
tradition, or that they were dangerously overconfident of their own abili- 

or gain the traits of that creature; or become party to certain secrets 
ties. Either way, it us betterfor the cult that they failed rather than ending 

if the fetch is an ancestor. 
\ up as a flawed shaman. r 

There are two main choices when designing a fetch, an Awak- 
ened Fetch, where the shaman simply unlocks or expands a hitherto 

GUuAaRrDdIiaAnN SPpIiRrIitTSs 
hidden part of his soul; or an Allied Fetch which is a separate spirit 

Warding 
that forms a lifelong pact with the shaman. Unless otherwise stated, 

Guardian spirits protect the animist from hostile magic or indeed 
a fetch cannot roam any further from the shaman’s soul to which it 

other spirits. They are found in places where vast magics have been 
is bound than his POW in metres. 

unleashed, such as huge ceremonies or battlefields for example. 
Within the mundane plane a guardian spirit protects the holder 

FeTtCcchH TYyPpEeSs 
of its fetish by interposing itself before offensive spells. The spirit can 

Awakened Fetch Allied Fetch 
neutralize spells with a Magnitude of up to twice its own Intensity. 

INT: As the shaman 2d6+6 If the spell’s Magnitude is greater, the spirit is unable to affect it. If a 
POW: As the shaman 1d6+12 ardian spirit encounters an anti-spirit spell, such as Spirit Block or 
CHA:  As the shaman 2d6+6 FeEtTcChH ABbILilIiTtIiEeSs 
Skills: 1d20 Ability 1d20 Ability 

Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, 1 Animate 11 Eternal 

Lore (specific Cult or Tradition) = 100%+(INTx2), 2 Autonomy 12 Mana 
Willpower = 50%+POWx2) 

3 Cannibalistic 13 Manifestation 

& Intensity: A fetch’s intensity is calculated by cross-referencing 4 Comprehension 14 Perceptive 

the POW of the fetch on the Spirit Intensity Table on page 5 Conjugate 15 Persistent 

133. 6 Covert 16 Sagacity 
& Spirit Abilities: A fetch also possesses 1d3+Intensity abilities, 7 Deadly 17 Shapechange 

selected or rolled randomly from the Fetch Abilities table. 
8 Discorporate 18 Spellcasting 

Gaining a fetch always brings certain side-effects: 9 Domination 19 Subjugate 

10 Healing 20 Warding 
& The fetch may influence the personality of the shaman 

depending on its totemic nature, for instance a bear spirit Banish, it may attempt to resist the spell before it is affected. 
fetch may cause the shaman to become soporific during the A guardian spirit offers additional protection by intercepting 
winter. enemy spirits and engaging them in combat before they can attack 

& The fetch may draw upon the Magic Points of the shaman in the animist. They do not initiate Spirit Combat otherwise. 
times of dire need. 

& The fetch will abandon the shaman if he betrays the teach- GUuAaRrDdIiaAnN SPpIiRrIitT 
ings of his shamanic tradition. 

Fetches can grow in experience just as the shaman does. If INS: 1d6+6 

desired, a shaman can transfer any or all of his Experience rolls to POW: As per Intensity 

his fetch instead. CHA: 1d6+6 

149



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

Skills: Like bound spirits, haunts cannot regenerate Magic Points 

Spectral Combat = 50%+POW+CHA, normally — but they are able to slowly drain vitality from the nat- 

Willpower = 50%+(POWx2) ural world around them, a process that creates an unsettling area 
shunned by animals, and where the plants are stunted and withered. 

HAaUuNnTtSs A haunt can tap the Magic Points of any animal or plant that has 
FEternal, Mamfestation, plus one or more of Glamour; Miasma, Spellcasting, lower POW than the Haunt’s Intensity. 

Telekinesis and Wither When creating a haunt its skills and Characteristics can be gen- 
Haunts are the spirits of the dead who did not receive the proper erated randomly or directly taken from the dead person in question. 

funeral rites or who have died violently, and are incapable of leaving Restless spirits which have persisted for centuries often grow stron- 
the material world, denying them progress to the afterlife, and leav- ger over time, permitting some haunts to achieve higher levels of 
ing the soul to suffer for all eternity. Intensity. 

Mortals may end up becoming haunts in several ways: 
HAaUuNnTt 

& Cursed by a shaman. By enchanting the soul to be perma- 
Characteristics 

nently bound to the material world, and forbidding it access 
INT: As per Mortal of the species 

to the Spirit World the shaman creates an unliving hell for 
POW: As per Intensity 

the deceased. 
& Unfulfilled Desires. Dying before an important vow was com- CHA: As per Mortal of the species 

pleted or expiring full of hatred and rage, desiring revenge. Skills: 

In these cases a desperate character can tie themselves to the Willpower = 50%+(POWx2) 

material world by an act of will (roll POW or less on a d100). Add other skills as necessary to give the haunt poignancy or purpose, Sing or Lore 

This enables them to persist as a spirit until they can complete (Vital Campaign Secret) for example. 

their last wishes. 
& Driven by Passion: A soul can become a haunt by dying whilst Spirit Abilities: A haunt gains a number of abilities equal to its Intensity, selected 

overwhelmed by a great passion - unrequited love or despair from the following list: 

for instance. In these cases the chance of returning as a haunt &K Glamour: The spirit can create illusions which are experienced by all 
is simply Games Master fiat, according to how fitting it would within a range of the spirit’s POW in metres. Each glamour costs 1 
be to the campaign. Magic Point to create, and affects one sense per level of its Intensity. 

Haunts are bound to the material world, an unseen presence The ability is often used to replay the events that caused the haunt to be 

fully aware of what is occurring around it but unable to leave the created. 

immediate area of the location or item to which they are tied. The & Miasma: The spirit can magically inducef eelings of dread and horror to 

object they are linked to can be their unburied remains, their place anyone within range of its aura. Fach wave of miasma costs the spirit 

of death, some object associated with them in life, or something else 1 Magic Pont. 

entirely. Ghost stories of many cultures are filled with varied exam- & Spellcasting: Becoming a haunt usually severs the spirit_ from any_form 

ples of ties that prevent haunts from passing on. of lagher magic, but some may retain the ability to cast Folk Magic. The 

Although frightening, most of these spirits can do little but haunt either uses those spells known whilst alwe, or gains 1d3+1 spells 

appear as ghostly apparitions to hapless observers, and bewail their such as Befuddle, Curse, Disruption, and so on. 

fate. Nonetheless, some acquire certain powers during their transi- K Telekinesis: The spirit has a STR equal to ils Intensity which it can use 

tion to a haunt, each ability costing the haunt dearly in Magic Points to move items around. This costs 1 Magic Point, and lastsfor its POW 

to invoke. in minules. 

Like most spirits a Haunt is usually invisible, it may spend 1 &K Wither: The spirit is able to physically damage corporeal beings. For the 

Magic Point to manifest itself visually for up to its POW in minutes. cost of 1 Magic Point, the spirit can make a single attack with a skill 

Most haunts must manifest in order to use any of their abilities. equal lo whatever Combat Style or Unarmed skill it possessed before 

A manifested haunt remains intangible to physical objects, able death. The blow wnflicts damage equal to ils usual Spirit Damage that 

to pass through solid objects at will. On the other hand it becomes ignores all non-magical parries and physical armour. Magical Armour 

vulnerable to magic, although destroying it with magical damage Points reduce damage as normal. 

simply disperses its essence but does not prevent its eventual return. With all the other powers at their command, haunts do not initi- 
By default all haunts possess the Recurring trait. ate Spirit Combat against mortals. 

Permanently dealing with a haunt is not easy. Trance or magical 
senses may reveal the location of whatever ties it to the world. If MEeDdIiCcIinNEe SPpIiRrIitTSs 
this is an object, destroying it may be enough to release the spirit, Healing 
but depending on its motivation the haunt may fight against such Medicine spirits are used to heal wounds or cure disease effects 
actions. If on the other hand it is a location or more abstractly, an imparted by sickness spirits. They are rarely bound to a fetish save 
event, undoing the binding may require determining why the spirit by shamans who can rejuvinate them, since as all spirits, they can- 
became tied in the first place, and trying to resolve the issue. If tied not recover Magic Points naturally in the mundane world. Medi- 
to its mortal remains, conducting the ceremonies appropriate to the cine spirits are therefore usually summoned directly from the Spirit 
haunt’s own culture, and traditions may very well break the bonds, World to perform healing tasks. 
releasing the restless spirit to the afterlife it yearns. 

150



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

Peaceable by nature, a medicine spirit may only initiate Spirit cousins. See the Creatures chapter for further details of a variety of 
Combat against sickness spirits, their innate foes. creatures. 

MEeDdIiCcIinNEe SPpIirRIitT NAaTtUuRrEe SPpIiRrIitTSs 

Characteristics Animal Nature Spirit Regional Nature Spirit 

INS: 1d6+6 INS : As the species 1d6 

POW: As per Intensity POW: As per Intensity As per Intensity 

CHA: 1d6+6 CHA: Equal to INS 3d6 

Skills: Skills: 
Spectral Combat = 50%+POW+CHA, Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, 

Willpower = 50%+(POWx2) Willpower = 50%+(POWx2) 

Abilities: See Above. 

NAaTtUuRrEe SPpIiRrIitTSs 
PRrEedDAatToORr SPpIiRrIitTSs 

One or more of Bless, Demesne, Domination and Endowment 
Bless, Persistent, Puppeteer 

Nature spirits gather at ordinary occurring concentrations of 
These are the more aggressive variants of animal or monster 

animals and vegetation, and are entities of the world’s natural flora 
spirits, prowling the Spirit World looking for suitable prey. Useful to 

and fauna. 
animists of less ethical traditions, predator spirits are able to track 

Nature spirits are frequently the subject of totemic veneration 
down a particular soul, no matter the distance, and then rip the 

where an animal, particular plant or even an area of land, becomes 
victim to shreds. Unlike other spirits, Predator spirits are capable 

representative of a community — the spiritual guardian and strength 
of hunting their prey in the physical world making them perfect to 

of a tribe. Animists who devote themselves to a totem in this way 
attack targets well protected from spiritual interference. 

are always on friendly terms with spirits related to their totem, but 
Two conditions need to be filled to summon a predator spirit into 

suffer neutral or hostile reactions from other predating or preyed 
the mundane world. 

upon animal nature spirits. Likewise those that venerate a particular 
First, predator spirits require some personal effects (hair, nail 

region of deciduous forest for instance, will find that the plant spirits 
clippings, clothing, and so on) to track their prey; the effects must be 

within are friendly, but the nature spirits of neighbouring coniferous 
burned or destroyed during the ritual to summon the spirit. 

woodlands are at best neutral, if not actively hostile. 
Second the animist offers the spirit a creature of some kind as 

Nature spirits embody a myriad of different abilities depending 
part of the summoning ritual. The creature’s soul must be defeated 

on the region or creature of origin. In general such spirits should 
in spirit combat by the predator; which then dominantly possesses 

not possess more Spirit Abilities than its Intensity. It can of course 
the host’s physical body, creating a warped creature (whether physi- 

select the same ability twice, but only when affecting a different attri- 
cally or psychologically) that unerringly hunts its victim, not ceasing 

bute, skill, effect (and so on), and are restricted to things that rep- 
to sleep or eat until the prey is caught. In fact the creature will reject 

resent a quality expressed by the corporeal form(s) of the species or 
all food save the flesh, and blood of the victim they are hunting. 

plant-life. If two or more nature spirits with the same specific ability 
Predator spirits often rely on their cunning or stealth to launch 

are used at the same time by the same animist, only the stronger 
spirit will take effect. attacks, since the creature it possesses is not invulnerable to physical 

damage. As the victim usually has no warning of his fate the first 
& Bless: The spirit can boost an Attribute or skill relevant to he will know of his pursuit is the first ambush. If the predator spirit 

that totem. A leopard spirit might boost Action Points for fails to make a clean kill on its initial attack, it retreats to reassess 
example. the situation; withholding its next attempt to ensure it has a tactical 

& Demesne: The spirit controls the plant life of a particular advantage. If the victim takes flight the spirit pursues; and, because 
region. The spirit can control the growth, flowering, fruiting, it will never stop, this can cause grave distress to the prey. 
and defoliation of vegetation within range. These effects are The hunt continues until the host is killed or starves to death. At 
necessarily slow, but thanks to the vitality of the spirit, can be this stage the predator spirit can, assuming it has any Magic Points 
forced to occur out of season. remaining, attempt to possess a new creature. If defeated, or no new 

& Domination: The spirit controls behaviour of members of its host is nearby, it returns to the Spirit World freed of its obligation. 
own species. Thus a a spider spirit could exert command over Animists must consider the host creature carefully. Large animals 
every arachnid within range of its aura. are obviously more dangerous in combat, but find it difficult to enter 

& Endowment: Use a trait possessed by the totemic species, civilised places without attracting attention. Smaller creatures can 
such as a special sense or movement. For instance shark spirits pass unseen more easily, but may find it difficult to keep up if the tar- 
could grant the creature ability of Blood Sense or Swimmer, get flees, or to kill them when caught. Nothing prevents a human (or 
whilst a Lotus flower spirit might grant Venomous. humanoid) from acting as the host and, if this case, they take-on the 

wild, animalistic characteristics of a predator. This may be enough 
Nature spirits do not initiate Spirit Combat except against enemy 

of asignal to alert a target to a very big problem. 
nature spirits. 

A number of low Intensity predators can be summoned to 
Other than its POW, which is based upon its Intensity, the 

hunt as a pack — although each spirit summoning must be treated 
other Characteristics of a nature spirit match those of its corporeal 

separately. 

151



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

PRrEedDAatToORr SPpIiRrIitT very large creature may translate into a Major Wound, and possibly 

Characteristics even death when the animist returns to his original shape. 
In the latter case, iif the severity of a wound increases after the 

STR: As per Host 
spirit has been dismissed, the animist must make an unopposed 

CON: As per Host 
Endurance roll at a penalty of one skill grade per injured location, 

SIZ: As per Host 
or suffer the detrimental effects of the injury, based on its severity. 

DEX: As per Host Shape-shifting spirits are usually peaceable, and do not initiate 
INS: 2d6+6 Spirit Combat. 
POW: As per Intensity 

CHA: 1d6+6 ShHAaPpEe SHhIifFtTiInNgG SPpIirRIitT 

Skills: Characteristics 

Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, INS: As per Host 

Stealth = 50%+INS+CHA, POW: As per Intensity 
Willpower = 50%+POWx2) 

CHA: Equal to INS 
Spirit Abilities: In addition to Persistent, and Puppeteer, the spirit gains a number 

Skills: 
of Bless bonuses to its Attributes equal to its Intensity. Popular augmentations are to 

Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, 
the creature's Armour Points, Damage Modifier, and Movement Rate. 

> g Willpower = 50%-+POWx2) 

ShHAaPpEe--SHhIiFfTtIinNgG SPpIiRrIitTSs 
SIicCkKnNEeSsSs SPpIiRrIitTSs 

Shapechange Covert, Disease, Manifestation 
Shape-shifting spirits allow animists to change their physical Malevolent beings, sickness spirits inflict misery through infect- 

form into that of another creature or being — most frequently a crea- ing victims with the disease they carry. They are attracted by the 
ture or beast associated with their totem or tradition. An animist of departure of souls to the Spirit World, gathering close to the bodies 
the Great Bear Clan could, for example, use a shape-shifting spirit of the recently dead; but can also be drawn by congregations of 
to become a grizzly bear or similar ursine. other sickness spirits. Widespread plague can result from a small, 

Shape-shifting spirits must be embodied by the animist, a risky localised sickness as more, and more sickness spirits are drawn to 
practice because, like elemental spirits, shape-shifters cannot be the area. 
automatically recalled or dismissed. Lone sickness spirits lie in wait in the Spirit World waiting for 

The type of animal form a shape-shifter can adopt depends on unsuspecting mortals to approach. They then follow them until they 
the spirit’s Intensity. The greater the Intensity the bigger the crea- sleep or pass into an unconscious state. At this point the sickness 
ture. The Characteristics of creatures assumed are always those of spirit manifests, and engages the target in spirit combat. If it gains a 
an average member of that species. level of success the spirit infects the victim, and wanders off to find 

another host. Only rarely do they covertly possess a victim in order 
SPpIirRIitT InNtTEeNnSsIitTyY fFoORr SIZ oOFf CRrEeAaTtUuRrEe 

to come into contact with other mortals. 
Animists can bind sickness spirits into a fetish— and some evil 

1 7-12 shamans revel in such bindings — using them to sicken foes in direct 
13-21 combat. 
22-33 Unlike mundane diseases, those caused by spirits do not recover 

34-48 naturally even with application of the Healing skill. If the spirit has 

49-66 gone further, and maliciously possessed the victim, then not even 

67-87 the curative spells of Higher Magic will work — since unless the spirit 
is first driven out, the effects will return after the usual onset period 

88-111 
has run its course. 

High Intensity sickness spirits are not, thankfully, ubiquitous, and 
Summoning a shape-shifting spirit or calling it from a fetish 

animists very rarely have access to them. Knowledge of lethal sick- 
works as normal. Once embodied the animist must spend a Magic 

ness spirits is usually reserved to cults devoted to spreading disease. 
Point, and succeed in a Binding roll to force it back into its fetish 

Even then, a tradition will know only a handful of specific diseases, 
or return it to the Spirit Plane. This can be potentially dangerous: 

cach one an explicit spirit counting towards the tradition’s limit. 
if the animist has few Magic Points remaining, he may run out of 

Such dreadful cults are rare, and most likely the subject of sustained 
power before he can return to his own shape — trapping him in his 

attempts to eradicate them, for the good of the world. 
animal form. 

In his shifted form the animist gains the average physical Charac- 
SIicCkKnNEeSsSs SPpIiRrIitT 

teristics, Armour Points, Hit Points, Creature Abilities, and natural 
locomotion of the animal, but keeps his own skills. Physical dam- 
age sustained in the animal form is carried over between transfor- INS: 2d6 

mations (and vice-versa), although what might have been a Serious POW: As per Intensity 

Wound when shifted as a small animal may become a mere scratch CHA: 2d6 
when human. Whereas a Serious Wound suffered in the form of a 

152

~N O O = N 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  ANnIiMmIisSmM 

Skills: armour a wraith manifests has an Armour Point value equal to its 

Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, Intensity, but since wraiths are intangible to physical objects, these 

Stealth = 50%+INS+CHA, Armour Points only block magical damage. 

Willpower = 50%+POWx2) Wraith attacks are as intangible as the wraith itself, so unless 
parrying with a magically enhanced weapon any blow the wraith 

UNnDdEeAaTtHh SPpIiRrIitTSs inflicts passes through the defending weapon, and armour. Magical 
Animate (Dead Flesh) Armour Points reduce the wraith’s Spirit Damage by the magic’s 
Undeath spirits are the souls of dead mortals who thirst to return intensity. Wraith weapons inflict a chilling, insidious form of damage 

to the mortal world, usually by reinhabiting their own long dead which makes the wounds they inflict turn black with necrosis. Such 
body. They can often be found clustering near ancient necropolises wounds never recover naturally, but require magic to heal. 
or battlefields, relatively harmless unless summoned by an animist or Should a wraith’s opponents not possess magically enhanced 
provoked by some act of desecration. weapons, the spirit treats any parry as being an automatic failure, 

The only ability these spirits command is the ability to possess allowing the spirit the opportunity to generate Special Effects: being 
dead corpses, not necessarily their own — raising them as undead. impaled by a wraith dagger is every bit as nasty as being impaled by 
The potency of the spirit empowers the dead remains it occupies, areal one. Otherwise combat proceeds as normal save that cunning 
granting a bonus of triple its Intensity to the undead creature’s STR, wraiths will sometimes attack through an ostensibly solid object to 
and CON. It also gains the Undead creature ability. catch an opponent by surprise. 

An undeath spirit may only animate a corpse of up to their POW A wraith never initiates Spirit Combat, and is unable to pursue 
in SIZ. Once in control of a body they are loathe to return to the enemies beyond its tomb or place of death. Thus outmatched foes 
Spirit World. They are incapable of initiating Spirit Combat. always have the option of fleeing these deadly spirits. 

UNnDdEeAaTthH SPpIirRIitT WRrAaIiTthH SPpIiRrIitTSs 
Characteristics Characteristic 
INT: 2d6+6 INT: 2d6+6 

POW: As per Intensity POW: As per Intensity 

CHA: 3d6 CHA: 2d6+6 

Skills: Skills: 

Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, Spectral Combat skill = 50%+POW+CHA, 

Athletics STR+DEX+40%, Willpower 50%+POWx2) 

Brawn STR+SIZ+20%, 

Endurance (CONx2)+20%, 

Evade (DEX x2)+40%, 

Perception INT+POW+30%, 

Unarmed STR+DEX+40%, 

Willpower (POWx2)+40%, 

Combat Style STR+DEX+40% 

WRrAaIiTtHhSs 
Eternal, Manifestation, Wither 
Wraiths are angry, malevolent spirits that, whilst anchored to a 

specific location, can shift between the material, and Spirit Worlds at 
will. Their anger stems from their partial confinement to the mun- 
dane world, and partial denial of the Spirit World; products of a 
vengeful desire to protect their own tombs or as the by-product of 
necromantic battlefield sorceries, wraiths are wrathful, malicious 
spirits intent on venting their grievances. 
A wraith is similar to a haunt but far more potent. A wraith that 

manifests is capable of physically harming mortal foes but remains 
intangible to physical attacks, and is vulnerable only to magic. A 
wraith has only one hit location. Reducing its Magic Points to zero 
temporarily drives the creature back to the Spirit World for 24 
hours, after which its Magic Points fully regenerate. The only way 
to permanently destroy a wraith is to pursue it into the Spirit World, 
and destroy it there. Cunning wraiths sometimes recognise animists, 
and withdraw from combat early in order to preserve their Magic 
Points for potential Spirit Combat. 

It is typical for a wraith to manifest as it appeared in life, dis- 
playing its arms, and armour. They fight using their Spectral Com- 
bat skill inflicting their Spirit Damage on a successful attack. The 

153



Mythras:  Mysticism

B oF X = oM k¥ NI LA S K K (F & K E B« o XN 

Mysticism

| G S|B Mmoo Em K K KB 3 M Qaw T X W 

ysticism is the implementation of phenomenal abilities 
MEeDdIitTaAtTiIoOnN (IINNTT++CCOON)) 

by the force of one’s willpower, either via contemplative 
M Meditation is the ability to reach a state of concentration by 

concentration, or by summoning or suppressing strong 
removing all extraneous distractions. Once achieved, this higher 

passions. The effects of mysticism can be great if used wisely, but 
mind state permits the mystic to tap their inner powers, and perform 

despite being modest in comparison to other disciplines in terms of 
feats of parallel thought impossible to non-mystics. Increasing com- 

flexibility and raw power, it drains the psychic strength of the user 
petence in Meditation improves the mystic’s ability to concentrate 

quickly. However, the path of mysticism encourages a philosophy of 
on several mystical abilities simultaneously. 

self improvement, as it augments the natural skills and capabilities 
A mystic may maintain a cumulative level of Intensity of active 

of the user. 
talents equal to their Meditation skill divided by 10. Thus, a mystic 

Mystics do not study spells; instead they learn to channel their 
with Meditation 66% can manifest a maximum Intensity of 7. This 

energies into enhancing their personal capabilities, sometimes far 
intensity could be applied to a single active talent —in which case no 

outstripping those of their fellows. Through a combination of med- 
other talents could be used — or split between several talents: Aug- 

itative technique and applied knowledge, mystics can increase their 
ment X to Intensity 2, Invoke Y at Intensity 1, and Enhance Z to 

likelihood of success with skills, invoke seemingly supernatural pow- 
Intensity 4 for example. When a talent becomes inactive, its intensity 

ers, and develop incredible reactions to direct threats and other hos- 
is immediately released, and can be used for something else. 

tile situations. 
None of this is achieved through overt magic, but by under- 

standing the true nature of his capabilities, focusing on the ener- 
gies needed, and channelling them in the right way and at the right 
time to achieve what is needed. By necessity, a mystic’s powers are MEeDdITitAaTtIioONnSs oONn PoOWwEeRr 
self-centred: they cannot be conferred on others. Mysticism is a very Of all the magic disciplines avarlable in MyTHRAS, mysticism is per- 
personal journey that only the individual can experience. What he haps the least magical. To an external observer, much of what a mystic us 
learns on that journey elevates him far above the norm. capable of achieving seems the result of incredible skill or training, rather 

than some supernaturalf orce. The source of a mystic’s power, at least the 
Magic Points with which ke performs his acts of excellence, lends itself 

SEeeEkKIinNgG TthHE primarily to self generation (see Where Do Magic Points Come From, 
e page 115). This may contradict or undermine the principles behind the 

TRruUTthH WIiTtHhIinN magical ecology of the setting if the Games Master does not wish a more 
exotic form of mysticesm. 

The two key skills of mystics are Meditation and Mysticism. 
As an alternative, mystics may provide thewr own Magic Points by 

Meditation is used to train the mind of a mystic, enabling it to 
performing long hours of meditation, dance, creating art or even choral 

achieve a state of relaxation and perfect self-belief. It also enables singing, thus keeping the restoration of their power both in check, and also 
them to be able to concentrate on several activities at once. Mys- 

Ni n keeping with the philosophy of mysticism. ticism represents the depth of knowledge concerning a particular r 
mystical path, granting knowledge of the esoteric abilities - disci- 
plines known as talents - available to that philosophy. 

154



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM 

Myyssttiicismm (PPOOWW+CON)) Mjjuu’’s SaAgGaA 
A favthful student of the Path of Shadows, Mju is already in possession 

Mysticism is the knowledge concerning the secret techniques and 
of the talents Augment Perception, Augment Stealth and Invoke Dark Sight. 

abilities taught to a particular Path of Mystic enlightenment. It not 
Yet he has been forbudden from learning more of the path’s secret talents until 

only controls the maximum Intensity at which any particular talent 
he rises to the rank of disciple. To prove himself worthy, Mju s tasked to 

can be implemented, but may also govern how quickly the mystic 
climb Cloud-reach Mountain a week before the sacredf estival of Sun Return, 

masters each of the talents available to that path. 
and remain upon is summatf or seven days in deep contemplation of the inner 

Mysticism is used to achieve the following effects: 
meaning of his path. 

& Augment specific skills by shifting their difficulty grade Mju accepts the challenge, and begins the long trek across the desert of the 
& Enhance the mystic’s attributes (Damage Modifier, Healing hagh plateau to its northern peaks. He has many adventures along the way, at 

Rate, and so on) one point arding a par of susters who are seeking an ancient temple of Yethus to 
& Invoke particular traits or abilities clear the ruins of their evil. Eventually he reaches the white tipped mountain, 

carefully scaling its dangerously sheer slopes. The broken off summat s cold, 
A mystic is limited to using each individual talent at a maxi- 

windswept, and ice covered, but Mju takes this as part of the test, settling 
mum Intensity of one twentieth of the Mysticism skill from which 

hamselff or days of meditation to wgnore the hardships. 
it originates. Thus a mystic with 34% in the Path of the Awakening 

During the following days he starts to notice certain oddities about the 
Dragon would be limited to implementing any of its talents at an 

peak. A slightly rank smell in the brief periods the wind stops blowing Odd 
Intensity of 2 at most. However, using Meditation he may be able to 

scratches, and perhaps carvings on the rocks which_form a natural amphithe- 
maintain several of these talents at the same time. 

atre. Even some ragged scraps of what could be brown crusted desert robes 
Jrozen into the ice. Something about all these hinis at an unforeseen danger, 
50 Mju augments his Perception skill to keep alert during the remaining days 

PAaTthHSs AanNDd TAaLlEenNTtSs of meditation. 

Each incidence of the Mysticism skill must be tied to a specific On the night of Sun Return hus sharpened hearing picks up the sounds of 

foundation of mystical knowledge, known as a path. These paths are Napping wings. Mju invokes has second talent of Dark Sight, and spots a vast 
number of winged beasts all headingf or the summiat. In desperation he utilises 

often based on ancient hermetic teachings, passed down in sacred 
fus last talent to augment lus Stealth skill, squeezing himself into a narrow 

books or by esoteric gurus or secret mountain-top schools. 
A path contains knowledge of multiple mental disciplines called crevasse on the downwind side of the peak. All that night the assorted griffons, 

talents — namely skill augmentations, trait invocations, and attribute wgart, and giant eagles dance atop the mountain in a great ritual celebration, 

enhancements — which are defined later on in this chapter. There is and at day break, they fly off in different directions. 

no preset limit to the number of talents a path can contain, although When Mju_finally returns to the travelling caravan of his master and 

the mystical school that has developed the path will have imposed its explains in respectful tones the sights he saw, the old guru knows that unlike 

own limitations based on its particular doctrine. Furthermore the many before him, lis student passed the test. Promoted to a disciple of the 

talents contained within a path tend to be linked, and these natural Path of Shadows, Mju us now free to learn the next two talents of his path... 

relationships will impose their own limitations. 
For example, the Path of Abjuration might include: Augment Endurance, It should be noted that some talents are potentially very power- 

Augment Survwal, Invoke Denwal (Food), Invoke Denal (Water), Invoke Denial ful, and should be considered carefully before being made accessible 
(Sleep), Enhance Fatigue and Enhance Hit Points. Conversely the Path of Shad- to characters. Games Masters may wish to limit the availability of 
ows maght offer Augment Perception, Augment Stealth, Augment Ranged Combat certain talents according to cult rank, ensuring that characters learn 
Style, Invoke Adhesion, Invoke Astral Projection, Invoke Dark Sight and Enhance the secrets of their path in a particular order, and withholding the 
Fatigue. most potent abilities until the cult deems them responsible enough 

Paths are therefore the mystical equivalent of Combat Styles: to be trusted with such knowledge. 
diverse talents and abilities folded into the umbrella skill of Mys- Mystic characters begin play with knowledge of a number of 
ticism. A path is usually tied to a profession or philosophy, and talents equal to one twentieth of their Mysticism skill. These will 
depending on the setting it might be rare for an adept to learn more generally be the least potent of the talents available to that path, as 
than one. suited to a low ranking or novice student. 

These different combinations of talents can lend a character 
some quite remarkable capabilities in a very wide variety of unusual 

Learning Talents
situations that differ from theism and animism. EARNING ALENTS 

Learning new talents is not just a case of handing over cash as 
if a financial transaction. Rather it necessitates an investment of 
time and Experience Rolls as described in the Magic chapter on 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MYySsTtIiCcSs page 118. Even if a character has a sufficient number of Experience 

If a character begins the game as a mystic he must choose one Rolls available, consent to learn a new talent must be sought first 

path to follow that is built from talents either designed by the Games since knowledge of these arts is carefully restricted by the masters 

Master, agreed between the player and Games Master, or chosen of a path. 

from the examples given in the Cults and Brotherhoods chapter. Gaining permission to learn new talents usually requires the 

Only one path can be chosen at this stage but others can potentially mystic to demonstrate a certain base competence in skill, loyalty to 

be learned and developed during the course of play. the master who teaches them, and possibly proof of their readiness 

155



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM 

by undertaking a difficult or dangerous test. There are countless Mjuju’’s SaAgGaA 
ways for a mystical order to winnow out those unworthy of learning As a disciple of the Path of Shadows Mju has learned the talents Aug- 
their most powerful secrets. Roleplaying the interaction between the ment Perception, Augment Stealth, Invoke Adheswn, Invoke Dark Sight and 
mystic and his teachers builds the depth of their relationship to that Enhance Fatigue. In addition, afler spending nearly a_year meditating in the 
path, and can form the basis for adventures. deep desert, he has also created hus own Path of the Jerboa, via which he mas- 

tered the talents of Augment Athletics and Enhance Movement Rate. 
Tlus gwes lam a lotal of seven talents. However Mju only possesses a 

UssIinNgG MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM POWof 12 which means he may only maintain the concurrent practice of 
six talents at any time. Afler much thought he decides to drop Enhance Move- 

Mysticism permits some extraordinary powers which can pro- 
ment Rate from his daily mental exercises and keep the others. If needed he 

duce dramatic results. Although less inherently flexible than sorcery, 
can resume the practice of enhancing his Movement Rate, restoring the ability 

and less crushing than theism, in their own niche mystics can be 
afler a week of meditation; but at the cost of dropping another talent from 

formidable foes. Their talents can boost their skills to phenomenal 
fus repertorre. 

levels, grant them unusual physical or mental abilities, and increase 
their attributes to those of legendary heroes. 

To gain access to these inner mysteries requires constant and Secondly the mystic must have enough Magic Points remaining 

regular practice. Although expensive in terms of magical strength, to attempt the talent. If too few remain either the talent doesn’t 

being dependent only upon themselves, mystics have no need to work or they may suffer some detrimental effect (see Running out of 

enslave spirits or return to temples to regain their effectiveness. Magic Points page 117). 

Indeed the potent nature of their talents can pose a serious chal- Last but by no means least; the mystic must pass the requisite 

lenge to magicians who follow other disciplines of magic. Mysticism skill check. Failure to implement the talent normally 
results in nothing more than the loss of a few Magic Points. 

ImMPplLeEmMEeNnTtIinNgG Aa TAaLleEnNTt CossTts oOFf ImMPplLeEmMEeNnTtIinNgG TAaLlEenNTtSs 
Summoning the strength to implement a talent requires a mystic Talents cost a variable amount of Magic Points to activate 

to utter a short mantra or exhale breath in a focussed shout, whilst depending on their type —see Magnitude and Intensity below— and 
making some sort of mystical gesture — normally a sweeping or strik- the success level of the implementation roll. 
ing motion — which aids concentration. In addition the mystic must Once the base cost is known, the Mysticism roll is made: 
satisfy the following conditions. 

Firstly the mystic may only implement a talent which he has spe- & Critical Success: the talent works, and only half the Magic 

cifically been taught. Knowing a path does not automatically grant Point cost is expended. 

understanding (or awareness) of all the talents which belong to it. & Success: the talent works, and the full Magic Point cost is 
expended. 

COoNnSsEeQqUuEeNnCcEeSs oOFf MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM & Failure: the talent fails, and a single Magic Point is expended. 
& Fumble: the talent fails, and the full Magic Point cost is 

Although mysticism can be used in a number of exotic, tmaginative 
ways.from creating mysterious desert hermals to ascetic philosopher monks, expended. 

it 1s inevitable that players will eventually want to create warrior mystics; 
attracted by the thought of augmenting therr Combat Style skills or number 
of Action Points to unbeatable levels. ImMPplLeEmMEeNnTtAaTtIioOnN TIimMEe 

Games Masters should carefully consider the consequences of allow- All mystical talents require one turn of preparation per point 

ing mystics access lo these types of talents. If permitted, then practitioners of their Intensity, and no other action may be performed whilst the 

of these Paths of Mysticism will be near unstoppable by mortal oppo- talent is prepared. On the last turn of preparation the mystic makes 

nents — which s not necessarily a bad thing provided it is embraced by a Mysticism roll and, if successful, the talent is initiated immediately. 

the campaign setting 
Thas can be done in a number of ways. A devotee of a mystic warrior MAaGgNnIiTtUuDdEe aAnNDd InNtTEeNnSsIitTyY 

tradition may be treated with fear or_fawning respect so that the character Magnitude is the Magic Point cost required to call upon a talent. 
rarely has to fight. Ordinary soldiers may develop specific tactics to take on Intensity is the level of effect achieved. These are as follows: 
such_formidable mystics, saturating their defences with volleys of ranged 
weapon_fure or sacrificially attacking en masse, fully expecting half their & Augment Skill: 1 Magic Point per level of Intensity. A level 

number to fall. Perhaps mystic warriors are sofearsome that it sf orbidden of Intensity improves the success chance of the skill by one 

by law for them to kill save in times of war or on specific command of grade. For example, increasing a skill from Standard to Easy 

their master. costs 1 Magic Point; increasing it to Very Easy costs 2, and 

So unless warrior mystics are commonplace in the setting, the Games so on. 

Master should expect to have foes scythed down; the only challenges being & Tnvoke Trait: 2 Magic Points. All traits have a default Inten- 

other mystics, maybe those of an opposing path. To get the better of such sity of 1. 

a character may instead require political intrigue, use of narcotics or poi- & Enhance Attribute: 3 Magic Points per step of increase. Each 

sons, alternate forms of magie, cunning traps or maybe just playing on step is a level of Intensity (for example, enhancing Damage 

the mystic’s passions. Modifier by one step, from 1d2 to 1d4 costs 3 Magic Points; 

. 4 

156



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM 

enhancing from 1d2 to 1d6 costs 6 Magic Points, and so spend a week recalling the talent he wishes to replace it with. A Med- 
forth). itation roll is required to see if the mystic succeeds. If the roll fails, he 

not only loses access to the dropped talent but must spend another 
The upshot for mystics is that use of Mysticism can be Magic 

week in meditative practice to re-master the new one. 
Point intensive when compared with other types of magic. How- 
ever, when used creatively, Mysticism can be incredibly potent. A 
character’s natural abilities can be enhanced to a level that is not 
necessarily available to other magical disciplines. TAaLleEnNTt DEeSsCcRrIiPpTtIioOnNSs 

Talents come in three varieties based upon the boost or ability 

DUuRrAaTtIioOnN oOFf TAaLlEenNTtSs they grant. These are either skill augmentations, invoking traits or 

Unless specifically stated in its description, a talent only remains enhancing attributes, as described in the following sections. Each has 

in place for the period of time required to action it. Once the imme- its own Magic Point costs and scaling limitations. 

diate task for which the talent was called upon has been concluded, 
its effect lapses. AUuGgMmEeNnTtIinNGg SKkIiLlLlSs 

Tor example, enhancing Movement Rate to run a race should The mystic augments his skills by concentrating on the nature 
last only for that race, augmenting a Combat Style would be for the of the task at hand, and channelling his own positive energies into 
length of that melee, whereas inducing Featherlight would remain attaining a desired result. A mystic literally envisages his own suc- 
until the mystic finishes walking over a river. cess, and then prepares himself to attain it. 

As a rule of thumb, once a mystic focuses his attention on Each level of Intensity improves the mystic’s chance of success by 
another, different task, the currently maintained talents drop. How- one difficulty grade (see Modifying Skills page 38). This can be used 
ever, until a talent is dropped the Magic Points used to implement it to counteract situational penalties the mystic is already suffering, or 
cannot start to recover. augment them to superhuman levels of skill. 

Common sense should be applied as to when the talent natu- A mystic cannot boost his skill chance beyond the grade of Very 
rally ends. It is unreasonable to suggest that an augmented Combat Easy. Any levels of Intensity beyond this are ostensibly wasted, but 
Style continues once the mystic’s foes have been defeated, or that an will come into play if the mystic is subsequently penalised by detri- 
invoked perception lasts beyond the investigation of a person or area mental circumstances. 
if the mystic becomes distracted by other events. 

InNvVoOKkIinNgG TRrAaIiTtSs 
DiisPpEeLlLliInNgG TAaLlEenNTtSs Traits are specialised physical, mental and emotional endeavours 

Since mysticism is based upon inner focus and strength of will, akin to the those found for many creatures. All traits by default have 
it is not normally susceptible to magical dismissal via spells such as an Intensity of 1, making them very useful abilities with which to 
Avert, Dismiss, Neutralise, and the like. The best way of dealing compliment the mystic’s other path talents. A trait confers a specific 
with mystics i3 to induce some form of mental or psychological dis- power for the duration it is implemented. 
turbance which may cause their concentration to break; or render The available traits are as follows: 
them unconscious, whereupon any active talents immediately drop. 

When subjected to such a disturbance the mystic is permitted ADdHhEeSsIioOnN 
to resist using their Willpower in an opposed roll against the skill The mystic can move freely on vertical surfaces, and even move 
actively used against them, in order to maintain concentration. For upside down on a ceiling with no special equipment. Such Move- 
instance, if injured by a thrown object, the mystic would oppose the ment is always at half the mystic’s normal Movement Rate. 
Athletics roll of the thrower. Some discretion is required to ensure 
that the distraction is valid to the situation. A separate Willpower roll ARrRroOWwCcUuTt 
is needed for each active talent. The mystic is able to parry and deflect projectiles (arrows, darts, 

Conversely mystics have no ubiquitous way of defending them- spears, and so forth) using his bare hands; or weapons not normally 

selves against direct magical assault, save by augmenting skills such permitted to perform such feats, such as swords or whips. 

as Endurance, Evade or Willpower. 
ASsTtRrAaLl PRrOoJjEecCTtIioOnN 

The mystic can project a visible, albeit ethereal image of himself 
LIimMIitTaAtTiIoOnNSs tToO TAaLlEenNTtSs to a distance in kilometres equal to his Meditation skill. The Astral 

The maximum level of Intensity at which an individual talent Protection acts a conduit for the mystic to communicate with and 
can be implemented is equal to one twentieth of the relevant Mys- observe a distant location, but he cannot physically interact with it. 
ticism skill. 

The maximum combined levels of Intensity of all active talents AUuRrAa (X) 
cannot exceed the Mystic’s Meditation skill divided by 10. The mystic projects a particular kind of aura (Fear, Intimidation, 

No matter how many paths and talents a mystic knows, he may Serenity, Mastery, and so on) that can be used to present a particu- 
only actively practice a limited number of them. A mystic can con- lar aspect to those who behold him. Overcoming the mystic’s aura 
currently maintain the training of a number of talents up to half the requires an opposed roll of Willpower versus the mystic’s Mysticism 
value of his POW. If the mystic wants to change one of the talents roll for invoking the trait. The aura affects all things within a radius 
regularly practiced, he may discard it from his training regime, and of the mystic’s POW in metres. 

157



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM 

Mjuju’’s SaAgGaA to attempt to remain unperceived by the mystic is one grade more 

Mju is travelling the dark streets of Meeros one night hoping to meet an difficult. 

oldf riend, when he spots a suspiciousf iguref litting along an alleyway, curved 
FeEaAtThHEeRrLliIgGhHTt 

knife in hand. He covertly follows the suspected assassin into the sacred grove, 
The mystic’s physical weight becomes negligible, allowing him 

located next to the senate house. Unfortunately for the mystic it w5 autumn, 
to balance on impossibly thin or slender surfaces, including those 

and the ground is littered with dry leaves which crunch underfoot. The Games 
that should not be able to support the his mass (twigs, saplings, and 

Master rules that crossing the leaves unheard s a Formudable task. So Mju 
SO on). 

lakes a_few moments to_focus on his Augment Stealth talent, implementing it 
at an Intensily of 3 to ensure success. This costs ham three Magic Points and 

FoORrMmIiDdAaBbLlEe NAaTtUuRrAaLl WEeAaPpOoNnSs 
modifies the difficully gradefrom Formidable to Eas). 

The hands and feet of the mystic are treated as size Large for the 
Mju follows the suspicious man into the senate house. Inside the peri- 

purposes of attacking and parrying in combat. 
style building it s almost putch black, Litle light from the starry night sky 
penetrating through the roof opening. Momentarily stumped Mju eventually HEeAaRrTt SlLooww 
discerns a_faint tllumination on the far side of the audience chamber; where The mystic is able to finely control his heart and metabolic rates, 
the knife wielder; holding a sofily glowing orb, s conversing with a shadowy reducing them almost to a standstill. Using this trait a mystic must 
cloakedf igure. remain completely inactive for its duration but, to all intents and 

Despite his augmented Stealth skill, Mju somehow gives away lus presence purposes, has no pulse, no heart rhythm, and organic functions 
as he creeps closer to the clandestine meeting. In a heartbeat the globe is extin- have ceased. He becomes immune to other Life Sense attempts and 
guished. Mju hears the refined accent of a Meerish noble whisper all him’ appears to be dead. Once the trait finishes the mystic’s faculties are 
before the sound of departing sandals leave the marbled hall. Hearing no other fully restored. 
Jootsteps Myu realises his life is in extreme danger: 

He decides he needs to invoke lus Dark Sight talent, taking a voluntary ImMmUuNnIiTtYy (XX ) 
penally to his Mysticism skill (see Casting Requirements page 119) for not The mystic is completely immune to one specific type of damage 
whispering the mantra aloud. Despite this Mju succeeds, andf or the cost of caused by a particular source. This source can be magical, physical, 
2 Magwc Points, reveals the darkened chamber to his mystical senses. The or energy based, but should be quite narrow in scope. Examples 
hunting knife weelder has no such advantage, and Mju breaks his neck from include, but are not limited to: cold, fire, electricity, iron, poison, 
behind. A quick investigation reveals the ritual scarring of the Brotherhood of disease, cutting, crushing, falling, impaling, and so on. 
Dust, branded upon the assassin’s tongue; the favoured tools of the Badosh 
Warlords... InNdDOoMmIiTtAaBbLlEe 

The Mystic is utterly immune to attempts at mind control or 
domination, including spells and spirit possession. 

AWwAaRrEeNnEeSsSs 
The mystic is aware of a particular kind of emanation (threat, LifFeE SeEnNSsEe 

love, danger, magic, and so on) within a radius equal to his POW In tune with the rhythms of nature, the mystic can determine 

in metres. He cannot gauge specifics; only that the emanation exists the vitality of any living thing by touch alone. If the mystic touches 

and is close by. another he learns of the target’s current injuries, Fatigue level, and 
whether it is currently afflicted by any poison or disease. The mystic 

DAaRrKk SiIgGhHTt is also aware of any form of life within a number of metres equal to 
Allows the mystic to ‘see’ normally in any level of limited light, his Willpower skill, which may make Stealth difficult to accomplish. 

even its complete absence. 
MAaGgIiCc SEenNSsEe 

DeenniiAaLl (X)) Similar to Life Sense but instead permits the mystic to detect 
The mystic can deny the effects of one specific environmental magical emanations over distance. If the mystic touches another he 

condition. Denial (Rain), for example, would keep the mystic dry learns of the target’s current magic points, carried enchantments, 
in even the most intense monsoon; Denial (Air) allows the mystic and active spells. 
to forgo breathing for an extended period; Denial (Falling) would 
allow the mystic to briefly levitate above the ground; Denial (Sun- NIigGhHTt SiIgGhHTt 
light) would prevent the burning, dehydrating effects of the most Allows the mystic to treat partial darkness as illuminated, and 

intense sun. darkness as partial darkness. 

EAaRrTthH SEenNSsEe PAaIinN COoNnTtRrOoLl 
The mystic has a perfect sense of direction, depth and orienta- The mystic is inured to pain and able to work through its effects. 

tion beneath ground, and suffers no penalties to Perception rolls for Endurance rolls when experiencing any kind of injury are consid- 

underground environments. ered to be automatic successes. 

EcHhOoLlOoCcAaTtIioOnN SPpIirRIitT SEenNSsEe 
The mystic senses his environment through reflections of sonic Similar to Life and Magic Sense, but the mystic’s senses are 

waves. This means that he can perceive others that may be either attenuated specifically to the activity of spirits and the spirit plane. 

motionless or hidden. In such circumstances, using a Stealth roll The mystic can sense what spirits are active within a radius equal to 

158



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM 

Mjuju’’s SaAgGaA 
Sent to spy on the nefarious Badoshi Warlords to assess their plans for 

war againstM eeros, Mju is attempting to sneak into their compound — a lofly 
valley fortress lugh in the Grey Peaks. Moving cautiously, he s traversing a 
long, hagh corridor which leads to the pleasure gardens of the inner courtyard, 
and needs to bypass the six alert guards waiting at the end of the passageway. 
Knowing that if he is seen he will be attacked, Mju considers hus options. 

Frst he invokes Adhesion which gives him the ability to traverse sheer sur- 
faces and ceilings. Mju immediately scuttles up the closest wall, and crouches, 
spider-like, on the ceiling, where none of the guards will think to look. Next 
he decides to boost hus Stealth by Intensity 2. Thus increases lus curcumstan- 
tial modifier from Standard to Very Good, doubling hus base Stealth skill to 
160%. 

He carefully manoewvres along the ceiling and the Games Master calls 
Jor a Stealth roll to gauge Mju’s progress. Luck is against him, and he rolls a 
96 which is an automatic failure. Even with their Perception skills suffering 
a 60% penally (from Mju’s augmented Stealth skill exceeding 100%), one 
of the guards notices somef alling grit dislodgedf rom the ceiling, looks up, and 
spots the skulking myst. 

Mju immediately leaps down behind the sentrees, diving into the luxuriant 
growth of the flowering gardens. Then in the few moments it takes for the 
Stunned guards to react, he stips into a waler lily covered pool. Knowing that 
the grounds will be thoroughly searched, Mju drops his Adhesion talent, free- 
ing up as much of hus meditative capacity as possible to enhance hus Fatigue 
by four levels, whilst still maintaining his augmented stealth. 

Three of the Badoshi arrwe to check the pool, remaining there_for over 
lwo manules lo ensure nobody is huding beneath the surface. Although Mju 
look a deep breath before immersing humself; he eventually runs out of aiy 
and soon burns through the extra Fatigue levels, almost drowning before the 

his Willpower in metres and, if he succeeds in an Insight roll, can guards leave lo search the rest of the garden. Now out of Magic Points, and in 

gauge the general intensity of the spirit entities. Spirit Sense confers serious jeopardy of capture or death, Myu stealthily flees the fortress, cursing 

no other powers or protection when dealing with spirits. uts bad stonemasonry... 

SqQUuEeEeZzEe 
FaAtTiIgGuUEe 

The mystic is able to manipulate his body, allowing him to 
Each point of Intensity negates a level of Fatigue. This attri- 

squeeze into recesses and through gaps that would otherwise be 
bute can be enhanced pre-emptively in anticipation of becoming 

impossible. The smallest opening, hollow or volume the mystic may 
fatigued. Thus a ‘fresh’ mystic who spends 6 Magic Points could 

utilise is one third of his SIZ. 
grant himself two buffer levels of Fatigue which could be lost before 
he started feeling the effects of his strenuous activity. 

EnNHhAaNnCcIinNGg ATtTtRrIiBbUuTtEeSs At the conclusion of the task any negated levels of fatigue return, 
Mystics can enhance an Attribute, temporarily increasing its potentially causing the mystic to collapse into unconsciousness. 

effectiveness. The following attributes can be enhanced in the ways 
described below. Luck Points and Experience Modifier cannot be HEeAaLlIinNgG RAaTtEe 
enhanced. Enhanced Healing Rate works slightly differently to the standard 

Attribute Enhancement rules. The amount of Hit Points healed is 
ACcTtIioOnN POoIiNnTtSs not increased, but the speed at which Healing Rate works is. Each 

Each level of intensity increases available Action Points by 1. level of intensity improves the speed of recovery by one step as 
The additional Action Points can only be used for defensive actions follows 
in combat. Thus, a mystic who spends 6 Magic Points to enhance 
his Action Points from 3 to 5 may only use these additional Action & Combat Rounds 

Points to Parry or Evade. He cannot use the additional points to & Minutes 

make additional attacks or cast additional magic. & Hours 

& Days 

DAaMmAaGgEe MOoDIdFifIiEeRr & Weeks 

Each point of Intensity increases the Damage Modifier by one &« Months 

step. Thus, at Intensity 3 (for a cost of 9 Magic Points, if available) a 
Usually Minor Wounds heal at a rate of 1 Day, Serious Wounds 

mystic’s Damage Modifier of +1d2 would increase to +1d8. 
at a rate of 1 Week, and Major Wounds at a rate of 1 Month. Each 
level of Intensity changes the speed of healing. Thus, at Intensity 

159



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  MYySsTtIiCcIisSmM 

2, hit points are recovered at the following speeds: Minor Wounds Above: The fabled Floating Citadels of the Azure Mystics. These sages 
1 Minute, Serious Wounds 1 hour, and Major Wounds 1 day. specialise i the Adjuration of the Physwal Earth, focusing on the Denial 
Enhanced Healing Rate rapidly speeds-up recovery but it will not of Gravity. Through their advanced state of enlightenment the Azure Mys- 
reattach severed limbs or restore the use of maimed ones. tics have been able to raise their monastery citadels into the skies. They drift 
A mystic may remain in a healing trance for as long as it takes amongst the clouds covering many leagues a day in unguided flight, going 

to fully recover. However he may perform no other tasks during this wherever the air currents dictate. 
time. 

HiiTt POoIiNnTtSs 
Each level of Intensity boosts Hit Points in every location by 1. 

So an Intensity 4 Hit Point enhancement would raise all Hit Loca- 
tions by 4 points. These additional Hit Points absorb damage first, 
before the natural Hit Points are affected. 

However these temporary Hit Points do not change the Serious 
and Major Wound boundaries, which remain tied to the mystic’s 
natural Hit Points. Enhancing Hit Points after a Serious or Major 
Wound is suffered does not permit damaged locations to return to 
functionality. 

MOoVvEeMmEeNnTt RAaTtEe 
Fach level of Intensity increases Movement by 2 metres. 

InNIitTiIaAtTIivVeE 
Each level of Intensity adds 2 to the Initiative roll. 

160



Mythras:  Sorcery

=% X o2 M K GO F m KT K = I R UL I < < | 

Sorcery
YL 
B oy 

| U G S [ R L L= = 1 1 I & KB A B« 7 o XN 

orcery is the technique of invoking magical effects through the 
understanding and application of transcendent knowledge. MAaNnIPipUuLlAaTtIinNgG 

S Once a sorcerer comprehends the objective rules of reality, 
they can employ them in a repeatable and methodical manner. Of tThHEe COoSsmMOoSs 
course this does not mean a sorcerer can figure out these funda- The practice of sorcery requires two core skills, Invocation and 

mental laws for themselves, only that once a technique or formula is Shaping. Invocation reflects the depth of knowledge concerning a 

learned, they can manipulate it in a variety of ingenious ways. particular philosophy or school of sorcery; whilst Shaping is the skill 

The path of sorcery is often a hard one, requiring much time of the sorcerer to manipulate the parameters of a spell, so that can 

spent in study and research. Even its reputation can be viewed with be cast in a flexible and innovative manner. 

an element of suspicion when compared to the worship of com- 
munal gods or the veneration of tribal spirits; as those not privy to InNvoOcAaTtIioOnN (IINNT x2) 
its secrets tend to regard it with jealousy or perhaps fear, especially Invocation represents a sorcerer’s ability to successfully cast spells 
when the sorcerer is an aloof recluse without need for or responsibil- learned from a particular source, be that a grimoire, mentor, school, 
ity towards his community. extra-planar demon or even an ancient artefact. The precise scope 

Not all practitioners are loners. Some take apprentices to pass on 
of what the skill covers depends upon the campaign setting, but each 

the art to those of the next generation, whilst others form schools 
incidence of Invocation must be assigned to a specific type or well- 

or guilds in which they share their knowledge in return for mutual spring of sorcery. 
protection or a degree of respectability. More sophisticated societ- The skill encompasses a plethora of magical principles from 
ies often evolve specialised orders, utilising their unions to practice comprehending the philosophy underlying how that type of sorcery 
particular types of sorcery as a profession, from itinerant weath- works; to being able to achieve the necessary mental state to manip- 
er-workers to mercenary spell-swords. At its pinnacle, sorcery can ulate reality. As the value of this skill increases, so does the capability 
even be used to shield nations from more ‘primitive’ forms of magic, of the sorcerer to create greater changes. 
or provide an increase to the standard of living by the maintenance The Intensity of a sorcery spell is equal to one tenth of the Invo- 
of innovative enchantments. 

cation skill used to cast it. 
Whilst the ability to cast sorcery, depending on the campaign 

setting, may be limited to those born to it or trained in the art from 
childhood, each sorcery spell is merely an invocation which can be ShHAaPpIinNgG (IINNTT++PPOOW)) 
mastered by those sorcerers willing to spend the time to grasp its In their default form, sorcery spells are relatively feeble in scope. 

philosophical meanings, or at least to memorise the methodology. Shaping is the method used to change the parameters of a sorcery 

As such, most orders of sorcery keep the secrets of their most potent spell so that it can be wrought to meet certain requirements, such as 

magics well hidden, even to their own students, for fear of the spell’s increasing its range or duration. 

power being abused, or corrupting its wielder. Once the base concepts of Shaping are known, they can be 

Although sorcery is often viewed as a dark or evil in Sword & applied to any spell known by the sorcerer; no matter its school or 

Sorcery literature, it need not necessarily be so. Sorcery can be used tradition. Thus sorcerers normally need only learn a single Shaping 

beneficently or play a key role in societies lacking other forms of skill (see Restricting Components of Sorcery Spells page 165). 

magic, depending on the manner in which the Games Master wishes Shaping is never rolled against when casting sorcery, rather it 

to present it. acts like a governor to limit the degree of modification which can be 
applied to a spell. The maximum level of alteration is equal to one 

161

Iv] 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

tenth of the value of the Shaping skill. Thus a sorcerer with Shaping DuuRraATtiIoOnN 
47% would be able to apply 5 points to shape the parameters of any Sorcery spells have a default duration equal to the POW of the 
sorcery spell he cast. caster in minutes. 

These points may be divided up amongst any of the following Applying one or more points of Shaping to the Duration com- 
components to optimise the spell as desired: ponent will extend the length of a sorcery spell as noted in the table. 

The spell remains running for the entire duration, although in some 
& Combine: Used to fuse together several spells into a single 

cases part of its effect may require active concentration to function 
casting 

(see Concentration page 166). 
& Duration: Used to extend the period of time the spell’s effects 

Some spells may end up with an extended duration which can 
last 

last hours, or even longer. In these cases the Magic Point Attribute of 
& Magnitude: Used to penetrate magical defences or resist mag- 

the sorcerer is temporarily reduced by the number of Magic Points 
ical attacks 

used to cast that spell until the magic is dropped or expires. 
& Range: Used to increase the distance a spell can be cast over 
& Targets: Used to increase the number of targets affected by 

MAaGgNnIiTtUuDdEe 
the spell 

Sorcery spells have a default Magnitude of 1, making them weak 
and vulnerable. 

COoMmBbIiNnEe Applying one or more points of Shaping to the Magnitude com- 
This component permits the sorcerer to combine the effects of ponent will improve its ability to overwhelm magical defences or 

several sorcery spells into a single casting, so that they all affect the resist magical attacks. It has no effect on the Intensity of a sorcery 
target simultaneously. This not only saves time on casting, but also spell which is solely based upon the caster’s Invocation skill. 
preserves Magic Points, as all the conjoined spells share the same 
shaping components (see Invocation Costs page 165). Use the fol- RAaNnGgEe 
lowing guidelines when combining spells: Sorcery spells have a default Range of Touch, requiring that the 

recipient be within physical reach of the caster. 
& A spell may not be combined with another instance of itself; Applying one or more points of Shaping to the Range compo- 

only different spells may be combined nent will allow the spell to be cast over greater distances, potentially 
& If the conjoined spells come from different sources, then the achieving ranges beyond the immediate perception of the caster. In 

lowest Invocation skill is used as the base casting chance such cases the sorcerer will need alternate methods of observing the 
& The conjoined spells must all share the same target or targets target. 
& Any shaping applied to a combined casting is assigned to Sorcery spells limited to Touch range may only be cast on oth- 

cach, and every one of the spells involved at no extra Magic ers if physical contact can be maintained for the entirety of the 
Point cost Invocation. 

& Fach additional spell added using combine, costs one extra Once someone or something is affected by a sorcery spell, it 
Magic Point and increases the difficulty grade of the Invoca- continues even if they travel beyond the spell’s Range. Spells which 
tion roll by one step (see Focus page 165) require Concentration (see page 166) lapse into passive mode once 

the target exceeds this distance, but only for the period it remains 
Although combined spells might require several different resis- 

beyond the Range limit. 
tance checks, the target only makes a single resistance roll — the 
result matched against each requisite opposed skill. Thus it is per- 

TAaRrGgEeTtSs 
fectly possible, for example, to save against all the combined spells 

Sorcery spells have a default Target of one object, creature or 
requiring Resist Endurance whilst simultaneously failing to throw 

person, which may be the caster himself. 
off the Resist Willpower spells. 

ShHAaPpIinNgG TAaBbLlEe 

Points of Shaping Combine Duration (Mins) Magnitude Range Targets 

None None POW 1 Touch 1 

1 2 Spells 2xPOW 2 Im x POW 2 

2 3 Spells 3xPOW 3 5m x POW 3 

3 4 Spells 4xPOW 4 10m x POW 4 

4 5 Spells 5xPOW 5 50m x POW 5 

5 6 Spells 6xPOW 6 100m x POW 6 

6 7 Spells 7xPOW 7 500m x POW 7 

7 8 Spells 8xPOW 8 lkm x POW 8 

8 9 Spells 9xPOW 9 5km x POW 9 

9 10 Spells 10xPOW 10 10km x POW 10 

10 11 Spells 11 x POW 11 15km xPOW 11 

Each point... +1 Spell +1 x POW +1 Magnitude +5km x POW +1 

162



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

FuURrTthHEeRr EXxTteEnNDdIinNgG DUuRrAaTtIioOnN ScChHOoOoLlSs AanNDd SPpEeLlLlSs 
Some Games Masters may_find the duration of sorcery to be too lim- A sorcerer’s power and spells are restricted to the particular phi- 

utedfor how magic works in their campaign setting The_following alter- losophy or tradition of sorcery he studies. Named schools of sorcery, 

native progression s offered to those that like to greatly extend the active the term represents a collated body of knowledge rather than a for- 

¢ffects of spells. Bear in mind however that until a sorcery spell hasf inally mal organisation. 

completed, the Magic Points used to cast it do not recover: Access to a specific school of sorcery can be held by particu- 
lar groups, individuals, objects or even locations. Thus a sorcery 

Points of Shaping Duration tradition need not necessarily be taught by a formal cult, rather it 
can potentially be self-learned if the sorcerer can comprehend the 

None Caster’s POW in Turns 
source for himself. 

1 Caster’s POW in Rounds 
For instance a sorcery cult could be nothing more than a group 

2 Caster’s POW in Minutes 
of loosely affiliated wizards who are all aware, and make use of a 

3 Caster’s POW x 5 Minutes particular source; an infamous tome such as the Scroll of Khronus 
4 Caster’s POW x 15 Minutes or the psychic powers gained by inhaling the deadly narcotic smoke 
5 Caster’s POW x Hours of the ebony lotus; some discovering the secrets by themselves, oth- 
6 Caster’s POW x 6 Hours ers guided by a mentor already privy to the knowledge. 

7 Caster’s POW x Days In a similar vein, there are no preset limitations as to how many 

8 Caster’s POW x Weeks spells are available to a particular school of sorcery. Yet the spells 
accessible to that philosophical path will generally be related in 

9 Caster’s POW x Months 
terms of metaphysical mechanics as to how they work, or will pos- 

10 Caster’s POW x Years 
sess similar supernatural effects. 

Each point... Continue progression: Decades, Centuries, 
For example the Stygian Path s a school of sorcery which specialises in 

Millennia, and so on... 
manipulating darkness, granting access to the spells: Animate Darkness, Dom- 
inate (Reptiles), Palsy, Sculpt Darkness, Smother, Teleport (via Shadows), and 

- 4 Wrack (Darkness). Whereas the Masters of Metamorphosts may learn a school 
of sorcery that controls the changing of things using the spells: Abjure,Diminish, 
Enhance, Haste, Regenerate, Shapechange and Transmogrify. 

SoOUuRrCcEeSs oOFf KNnOoWwLlEeDdGgEe With this in mind, schools of sorcery should be crafted to fulfil 

The fundamentals of sorcery are as varied as the sources_from which a particular concept. They need not be balanced with one another; 

uts knowledge can be learned. All depends entirely on who, or what, has corrupt diabolic cults might indeed offer more spells than their 

preserved such arcane knowledge. Although sorcery is oflen tied to the benevolent counterparts. A grimoire might only grant a single, albeit 

archetype of reading cryptic old spellbooks, it need not have any relation- potent, spell; whereas a respected guild of sorcery could provide a 

ship with that particular stereoty pe. dozen. The precise balance or lack thereof is for the Games Master 

Sorcery maght instead be recorded in theform of towering prehustoric to decide when designing his campaign. 

pictograms carved into the sudes of mountains or be accessible only to those Further consideration should be made towards whether a sor- 

that drink the waters of a legendary well. Perhaps only those thatjourney cerer can join several guilds or discover additional sources of arcane 
beyond the boundaries of reality can master its esoteric secrets. knowledge. MYTHRAS is not predisposed towards the limitless accu- 

Of course the theory and practice of sorcery can be passed on by living mulation of innumerable spells, but rather the clever and innovative 

beings too, without need_for books or artefacts. Lone masters might hand use of a few. However, this should not preclude such occurrences if 
down their sagacity as ancient aural traditions to their students. Maybe that is what is desired. 

such wasdom us held only by demons or spirits of the otherworld, which 
must be summoned and appeased before they teach those who dare to call STtaARrTtIinNgG SOoRrCcEeRrEeRrSs 
them up. Sorcery could even be learned by listening to the hidden meanings 

A character starting the game as a sorcerer should choose a sin- 
of mournful hyena howls around campfires at might. 

gle school of sorcery to study; one designed by the Games Master, 
Infinite are the sources of sorcerous knowledge. The only limat is your 

agreed to between the player and Games Master, or chosen from the 
imagination. 

examples given in these rules or the relevant setting. Only one school 
- 4 of sorcery can be chosen at this stage but others can potentially be 

Applying one or more points of Shaping to the Targets compo- discovered during the course of play. 

nent will allow the spell to affect an increasing number of multiple In addition, the source of this sorcery should be decided also; 

targets, each one receiving the full consequence of the magic. That whether it is an object, a mentor or a cult. There is no penalty to 

is to say, each target receives an identical copy of the original spell. being self-taught, a common conceit of the Sword & Sorcery genre. 

Unless specifically permitted by its description, the targets of a Sorcerer characters begin with a number of spells from that 

spell may not be changed once it is cast. school equal to one twentieth of their Invocation skill. Once the 
campaign starts they are restricted in what additional spells they can 
study, and when they can learn them. 

163



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

KRrAaTtOoSs’’ SaAgGaA of advancing cult rank or even as the result of many months 

Kratos started out as a modest scribe in thefamed city of Meeros. Unfor- research and study. When knowledge is quite literally power, a sor- 

tunately, hus increasing interest in the arcane arts soon brought him into conflict cerer should not be able simply to purchase spells by handing over 

with the cult priests of Myceras, who exiled him on suspicion of stealing a cartload of silver. Although a gift might influence the mind of a 

Jorbidden texts. The scholar swore vengeance towards the city of hus birth and sorcerer’s mentor, the spell itself is almost always priceless. 

Journeyedf ar into unknown lands in search of true power: 
Ultimately Kratos found an old hag who taught kim the_fundamentals of 

sorcery n exchangefor certain... favowrs. After a year of subservience, suffer- USsIinNgG SoORrCcEeRrYy 
ing her horrible embraces, Kratos learnt the skills of Invocation (Stygian Path) 

Although sorcery is not necessarily the most potent type of 
32% and Shaping 33 %. Then, in a dastardly act of betrayal, he strangled 

supernatural power available to mortals, the ability of a sorcerer to 
his mentor; stealing the strange crystal which seemed to be the source of her 

shape his magic makes it extremely versatile. Sorcerers can weave a 
sorcerous knowledge. 

handful of awesome spells into a single, magic-efficient casting; blast 
Alone in the wilderness, the sorcerer is discovered by a troop of man-eating 

small units of warriors with the same spell; or even control the mind 
centaurs. Faced with becoming their next meal, Kratos attempts to invoke a 

of a victim from hundreds of kilometres away. This ability, which 
spell to_frighten the monsters away. Lacking the skill to affect the centaurs 

greatly augments one or more spell components, enables their magic 
directly, he tries lo Animate the shadows dancing about hus camp fire. 

to far exceed the more rigid parameters of other types. 
With his Shaping skill he has four points he can use to manipulate the 

The inherent flexibility of sorcery extends beyond its ability to 
magic. He uses 1 pownt lo extend the Range of the spell to 16 metres, so that 

be shaped. Unlike animism there is no dependency upon third party 
it can reach the centaurs. The remaining 3 points he places into the Tar- 

spirits which might slip from control. Similarly they need not return 
gels component, so that he can simultaneously controlfour separate shadows. 

to specific holy places to recover their magical strength unlike theists. 
His invocation is successful so he sends the amorphous figures of flickering 

In effect, sorcery grants its practitioner freedom from needing things 
darkness towards the slavering man-horse chimeras. To his great surprise, the 

or places. All that is required is knowledge of the spell, and enough 
centaurs yell in superstitious terron; and prostrate themselves at his_feet begging 

Magic Points to invoke it. 
Jfor mercy... 

InNvVoOKkIinNgG Aa SPpEeLlLl 
LeEaArRnNIinNgG SPpEeLlLlSs Casting a sorcery spell requires that the sorcerer performs a short 

invocation, allowing him to mentally impose the spell’s transcenden- 
Learning new spells requires an investment of Experience Rolls 

tal formula upon the cosmos, changing reality. It may be an envi- 
as described in the Magic chapter on page 118. Whether or not 

sioning of a complex glyph or articulate utterance of a harmonic 
new spells are available is a different matter. For example, an adept 

mantra. Whatever the procedure, for the spell to work the sorcerer 
member of a powerful guild may be withheld from freely acquiring 

must meet the following prerequisites. 
the more dangerous spells of the order; only being taught once they 

Firstly they must actually know the spell being cast. Simply read- 
demonstrate the correct level of understanding or responsibility. A 

ing or repeating a spell parrot fashion from something like a scroll 
mage who learns his art from a demon might instead need to provide 

will not work if the sorcerer has no understanding of its underlying 
the entity with a suitable offering (a diabolical deed or rare sacrifice) 

metaphysics. 
before he is shown a new spell. 

Secondly they must have the requisite number of Magic Points 
Likewise a self-taught sorcerer who picks up a grimoire cannot 

remaining. Attempting to cast a spell with insufficient Magic Points 
learn every spell inscribed within its pages as soon as they have the 
Experience Rolls to invest. There are limits to how much, and how KRrAaTtOoSs’’ SaAgGaA 
quickly a sorcerer can understand and absorb knowledge from the Now in command of a troop of loyal centaurs, Rratos sends them forth 
complex metaphysical implications of such a work. lo gather tribute and sacrificial victims whilst he spends lus time studying the 

As a rough guideline, spells accessible to a school of sorcery are strange artefact he stole. He knows thef ist-sized black diamond was the source 
usually linked or entwined in such a way that they must be learned: of the hag’s sorcery, from the cold tingling the crystal elicits when he touches it. 

Some dim memory suggests that this may be the Tear of Yethis, an infamous 
& In a particular order; acquisition of lesser incantations being 

relic said to be the only remainingfragment of a mighty Serpent Demon who 
needed to comprehend the underlying techniques to invoke 

once ruled the world. 
higher ones. 

Afler much experimentation Kratos discovers that pouring fresh human 
& When a specific degree of mastery is reached, each spell lim- 

blood over the stone causes its holder to experience vivid dreams in which the 
ited to a particular cult rank or value of the Invocation skill 

demon lord appears, passing on_forbidden arcane knowledge to he who would 
may be learned as the sorcerer has demonstrated the neces- 

learn to master such power. As hus skill and arrogance increase, Kratos begins 
sary level of comprehension. 

lo demand new spells from his diabolical mentor. The demon slyly agrees, 
« Only after the student has shown the correct attitude, 

providing the sorcerer us willing to pay the hellish pruce. 
behaviour or dedication to be permitted deeper knowledge. 

In exchange for the ritual slaughter of nine pure virgins from the highest 
Thus the learning of new spells is not an automatic ability or rankedf amalies of Meeros, the demon promases to teach the increasingly cor- 

right. Access to them must be earned through roleplaying and over a rupt Kratos the magical ability to shift between pools of shadow. The sorcerer 
period of time in the campaign. A new spell should be regarded as a readily agrees, little comprehending that the next spell will cost him far; far 
reward for completing a particularly difficult task, as a consequence more. 

164



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

means that either the spell doesn’t work, or something bad occurs to 
the sorcerer to find the last fragments of power (see Running out of ALlTtEerRnNAaTtEe COoMmPpOoNnEeNnTtSs fFoOrR SoORrCcEeRrYy SPpEeLlLlSs 
Magic Points page 117). Other parameters can be added to Shaping, granting sorcery spells 

Thirdly on the last turn of casting, the sorcerer must pass an additional strange and exotic abilities. Some of these components are not 

Invocation skill check. Failing to cast the spell correctly usually strictly balanced with one another; so care should be taken if introducing 

results in nothing bad save that the magic doesn’t work, or at worst them to a campagn. 

the squandering of a few Magic Points. Ablation — Used with spells which have the Resist trait, each point of 
shaping applied to Ablation grinds down any protective magic on the target 
which tries to block the incoming spell; reducing its Magnatude by the level 

InNvVoOCcAaTtIioOnN COoSsTtSs of ablation. This is still the case even if the protective magic successfully 
The cost of casting a sorcery spell depends on how much it is blocked the sorcery spell. 

shaped, and the success level of the Invocation skill roll. Focus — Used to ensure that a spell works, no matter what the mental 
Base cost is 1 Magic Point plus an additional one point per spell and physical distractions, each point of shaping applied to Focus permuts 

component modified. For instance a spell which has its Range and the sorcerer to 1gnore one level of difficully applied against them. This cov- 
Duration components increased will have a base cost of 3 Magic ers the loss of verbal or somatic components, mental state due to narcotics, 
Points. If several spells are woven together using Combine, then an combining multiple spells, and even penalties appliedf or suffering wounds. 
additional Magic Point is added to the cost for each extra spell. T hus component cannot raise the casting chance above s base value. 

Once the base cost is known, the Invocation roll is made: Fortune — Used with spells which have the Resist traut, each point of 

& Critical Success: the spell works but only half the Magic Point shaping applied to Fortune allows an additional casting rollfrom which 
the sorcerer selects the most_favourable result. A spell cast with 3 points 

cost is expended. 
of shaping applied to Fortune would permat the sorcerer to rollfour times 

& Success: the spell works, and the full Magic Point cost is 
and choose the best roll. 

expended. 
Precision — Used with spells that randomly target Hut Locations, each 

& Failure: the spell fails, but no Magic Points are expended. 
point of shaping applied to Precision allows the caster to adjust the dice 

& Fumble: the spell fails, and the full Magic Point cost is 
10ll by 1 to select the most advantageous location. 

expended. 
Swifiness — Used to hasten the casting of complex or heavily manipu- 

lated spells, each point of shaping applied to Swifiness reduces the casting 
time by 1 Turn, to a minimum of one. 

InNvVoOCcAaTtIioOnN TIimMEe 
The time taken to cast a sorcery spell is equivalent to 1 Turn plus N ' 

an additional Turn for each spell component modified. This is usu- 
ally the same as its Magic Point cost except in cases where Combine DIiSsPpEeLlLliInNgG Aa SoORrCcEeRrYy SPpEeLlLl 
(or the optional Swiftness component) is utilised. Sorcery spells resist dispelling using their Magnitude. Thus if this 

The Invocation skill check is made on the final turn of casting; component is left unaugmented sorcery can be fairly easy to dismiss. 

the result of the roll occurring immediately. 

LIimMIitTaAtTiIoOnNSs oOFf SoORrCcEeRrYy 
MAaGgNnIiTtUuDdEe AanNDd InNTtEeNnSsIitTyY There are no restrictions to the number of concurrent spells a 

Sorcery spells have a default Intensity equal to one tenth of the sorcerer can maintain, save that only a single Concentration spell 

caster’s Invocation skill. Their Magnitude depends on how many can be focused on at any moment in time. 

shaping points were devoted to that spell component. Due to the boggling complexity of sorcerous invocations, there 

Sorcerers need not apply the entirety of their available Intensity is a limit to how many spells a sorcerer can keep in his mind. Thus 

if they desire to limit the spell’s effect. a sorcerer may only memorise a number of spells up to the value 
of his IN'T characteristic. In the rare situation that the sorcerer has 
access to more spells that he has the space to memorise them, spells 
may be swapped by spending a week of intense deliberation in reclu- 

REeSsTtRrIicCTtiInNgG COoMmPpOoNnEeNnTtSs oOFf SoORrCcEeRrYy SPpEeLlLlSs sive isolation to exchange them. 
Not all schools of sorcery need have access to the same component 

parameters, not even the default ones. A campaign could be created where 
certain paths of sorcery lack knowledge of a particular shaping technique, 
perhaps being compensatedf or by the addition of a different, more exotic SPpEeLlLl DEeSsCcRrIiPpTtIioOnNSs 
component. If used in this way, sorcerers should require a separate and All sorcery spells are defined by several traits which control how 

spectfic Shaping skillfor each type of Invocation they know. each spell functions. By design sorcery spells lack a degree of physi- 

The LZemgaran School of Unseen Sorcery for example could teach cal and temporal description since these parameters can be modified 

Shaping but using only the components of Magnitude, Range, Targets by Shaping as it is cast. 

and Focus. Whereas the Inebriated Sorcerers of ‘Tzushan may teach This flexibility can make certain spells appear to be remarkably 

their apprentices the components of Combine, Duration, Magnitude and potent, especially those which have their duration or range greatly 

Fortune. extended. Such possibilities are intentional, providing an interest- 
ing opportunity for those who wish to cunningly manipulate their 

N\ 4 magic. 

165



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

ABbJjuURrEe (SSuUbBsStTaAnNCcEe/PRrOoCcEeSsSs)) 
Resist (Special) 
Abjure allows the recipient of the spell to abstain from some- 

thing usually required for life, utterly removing its need (or effect) 
until the spell ends. Each variant of the spell affects a specific sub- 
stance or process, which could be anything, including Food, Water, 
Breath, Sleep, Dreams, Narcotics, and so on. Due to its flexibility, 
the Games Master should use common sense when more unusual 
versions of the spell are used, for example Abjure (Narcotics) will not 
only remove any desire to take narcotics in the first place, but also 
ensure any already taken will no longer affect the target. 

The sorcerer can affect targets with a maximum SIZ of three 
times the spell’s Intensity. If the recipient is unwilling they are per- 
mitted to resist using Willpower. Exceedingly rare and exotic ver- 
sions of this spell exist such as Abjure Pain, Abjure Sensory Percep- 
tion, and even Abjure Ageing. 

ANnIiMmAaTtEe (SSuUBbSstTaANnCcEe)) 
Concentration, Resust (Special) 
Animate quite literally invests an inanimate object with a sem- 

blance of life, permitting it to move under its own power. Each vari- 
ant of the spell affects a specific type of substance, which can be 
fairly broad in scope. For example wood, stone, fire, darkness, rope, 
fabric, and so on. 

The sorcerer can animate an object with a maximum SIZ of 
three times the spell’s Intensity. Insubstantial substances such as air, 
fire, darkness or clouds are instead measured in terms of volume, 
with the sorcerer able to affect a number of cubic metres equal to 
the spell’s Intensity. The animated object gains a default Movement 

Most potential game abuses are handled in the spell descriptions. 
Rate of 1m, which may be incremented by assigning points of 

However, Games Masters who find that certain spell combinations 
Intensity (on a one for one basis) to movement rather than to the 

are causing problems should feel free to impose extra restrictions 
amount of SIZ or Volume affected. 

— such as reducing spell functionality, preventing the same spells 
Providing they have some degree of flexibility or the ability to 

being available to a single school of sorcery, or using the same tactics extrude portions of themselves, animated objects may perform com- 
against the player characters. 

plex physical manipulations. These are performed by using the sor- 
The following two traits are available to sorcery spells: 

cerer’s own skills, reduced by one difficulty grade. If combined with 
the appropriate Sculpt spell (see Shaping), the sorcerer can achieve 

COoNnCcEeNnTtRrAaTtIioOnNnN 
much finer control and ignore this penalty. Where necessary, treat 

The spell’s active effects only function so long as the charac- 
ter specifically concentrates on it. During this time the sorcerer is 
usually restricted to moving at a maximum of walking pace, and To Rock AanNDd RoLlLl 
performing Free or Reactive Actions (when necessary; use common The material and shape of an object has important implications on 
sense). Any passive elements of the spell continue running without how the Animate spell is used. 
the need to concentrate; for example a Fly spell requires concentra- For instance, a sorcerer who knows Animate (Stone) 78 % could use it 
tion to actually move, but it will simply keep the sorcerer floating to move a boulder of up to SIZ 24 (a little over 200kg), but he couldn’t 
in place if his concentration lapses. By default a sorcerer may only affect a solid cliffface with a much larger size, nor could he break a lump 
concentrate on a single Concentration spell at any one time. Jfrom it unless the fault bines and cracks already existed. However, a more 

insubstantial material like water 15 easier to divide up, so there would be 
ReessiistT ((EEnNdDuURrAaNnCcEe/ WWIilLlLpPoOwWEeRr/EVvAaDdEe)) no problem splitting off a small pool of waterfrom a lake. 

Offensive spells allow the target to make an opposed test of Shape us also vital. Animating a boulder would allow it to ponder- 
their Endurance, Willpower or Evade skill (as specified by the spell) ously roll about, but it obviously could not pick up an object, open a door 
against the casting roll of the sorcerer, to avoid the effect of the spell (although it might be able to smash through i) or anything else which 
entirely. To resist using Evade, the character must expend a Combat required limbs or dugits to achieve. An animated statue on the other hand 
Action. would possess the requisite appendages. 

Some obyects may appear innocuous but can be potentially formidable 
Be warned that some of the following spells are extraordinarily powerful, in the right circumstances. An animated bunch of ropes or a carpet could 

included only for the use of major antagonusts or as long lost arcane secrets. They be an excellent way of entangling opponents, or an animated fire sent 
are extremely rare and not intendedf or starting player characters. dancing through a tent encampment a deadly distraction. 

N\ 4 

166



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

the object as having a Damage Bonus based on twice its SIZ, or as potentially be reflected back at its caster. The sorcery can only affect 
an elemental of equal volume. spells possessing the Resist trait which have a Magnitude equal to or 

Sorcerers must actively concentrate to cause animated objects less than the Magnitude of the Castback. 
to move or perform complex manipulation. If their concentration In such cases if the recipient of the Castback fails to resist the 
lapses the object becomes quiescent until the sorcerer can focus his incoming spell, then it affects him normally. If on the other hand he 
will through it again. Objects which are already under magical con- succeeds in resisting, the reflected spell is sent back to its caster who 
trol are only affected if the Magnitude of the Animate is equal or in turn must roll to see if he himself suffers its effects! 
greater than the previous effect. Castback has no way of discerning the difference between hostile 

If the animated object is carried or worn by a living creature, or beneficent magic, and affects all spells save those the target casts 
then it may resist the spell with Endurance. Whilst the spell can be on himself. 
used to discommode/break such objects, their manipulation cannot The recipient cannot exceed a maximum SIZ of three times the 
be used to directly inflict harm on the creature (see Shrink page 174). spell’s Intensity. 

ATtTtRrAaCcTt (ThHRrEeAaTt)) DAaMmAaGgEe EnNHhAaNnCcEeMmEeNnTt 
Resist (Willpower) Damage Enhancement augments the physical damage inflicted 
Attract makes the recipient of the spell a scapegoat for certain, by an object or creature. This can be anything from natural weap- 

and usually harmful, occurrences. Fach variant of the spell affects ons, a two handed axe or even the spikes of a pit trap. The magic 
a specific type of threat, for instance spells, creatures, spirits or even increases the minimum amount of damage that is inflicted during 
missiles. Often used as a punitive curse or self-sacrificial gesture a successful attack, raising it to the value of the spell’s Intensity if 
rather than an offensive weapon, Attract draws all incidences of the dice roll is lower. The spell cannot inflict more damage than the 
its particular threat which pass within a radius equal to the spell’s weapon is normally capable of. 
Intensity in metres, redirecting them so that they target the recipient 
instead. DAaMmAaGgEe REeSsIisStTaAnNcCEe 

The mechanical effects of the spell depend entirely upon the Damage Resistance protects an (entire) object or person against 

type of threat: physical damage. It provides the recipient with a number of Armour 
Points equal to the spell’s Intensity. These do not stack with existing 

& Creatures: Attracts aggressive beasts with a SIZ of up to three protection (whether worn or natural) so that only the highest value 
times the spell’s Intensity. protection works. 

& Magic: Atracts offensive ranged magic with a Magnitude This magic does not necessarily need only to be cast on living 
equal or less than the spell’s Intensity. creatures. It can just as easily be used to toughen a sword, make a 

& Missiles: Attracts ranged weapons with a maximum damage door more difficult to hack through, or render a delicate glass bottle 
(including magical augments) equal or less than the spell’s near unbreakable. The target cannot exceed a maximum SIZ of 
Intensity. three times the spell’s Intensity. 

& Spirits: Attracts aggressive spirits with a maximum Intensity 
of half the spell’s Intensity. DiimiiNniishH (CCHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCc)) 

Resist (Willpower/Endurance) 
Diminish allows a sorcerer to reduce a physical or mental trait 

BAaNnIiSshH 
of a living target. Each variant of the spell affects a specific char- 

Resist (Willpower) 
acteristic, diminishing it by 2 points per Intensity of the spell —to a 

Banish enables a sorcerer to dismiss a spiritual or demonic entity 
minimum of 1. The target must possess the characteristic in ques- 

with a maximum POW of three times the spell’s Intensity, back to 
tion to be effective. 

the Plane from whence it was summoned (or from which it travelled). 
If the target is unwilling it is permitted to resist the spell, using 

If the target is unwilling it is permitted to resist using Willpower. 
Endurance if the spell is affecting a physical characteristic (STR, 

This spell does not work on spirits which are residing within a 
CON, SIZ or DEX) or Willpower if affecting a mental one (INT, 

fetish to which they are bound. If brought forth from the object 
POW or CHA). Note that creatures affected by Diminish (SIZ) actu- 

to perform a service, however, the spirit becomes vulnerable to the 
ally shrink, rather than becoming wasted and skeletal as with the 

banishment; which if successful, sunders the binding. Likewise Ban- 
Tap spell. 

ish does not work on spirits currently possessing a victim, but only 
those which are tricked into abandoning the host first. 

DOoMmIiNnAaTtEe (CCRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs)) 
Concentration, Resust (Wallpower) 

ByPpAasss ARrMmOoUuRr 
Dominate grants the sorcerer psychic control over a creature of 

Bypass Armour affects objects, armaments or the natural weap- 
the specific species the spell affects. The spell is limited by the intel- 

ons of creatures so that they pass through armour. The spell allows 
lect of the target, the caster only able to subjugate creatures with an 

the weapon or trap to ignore a number of Armour Points equal to 
INT or INS up to twice the spell’s Intensity. Those that fall within 

the spell’s Intensity. This spell also works against magical protection, 
this range may resist with Willpower. 

such as Damage Resistance or Shield. 
Whilst the sorcerer concentrates, he may mentally issue com- 

CAaSsTtbBaAcCkK mands to the victim, who (in most circumstances) cannot refuse. If 

Castback shields the recipient from magic in a somewhat hap- the sorcerer allows his concentration to lapse, the victim temporarily 

hazard manner, with the chance that any spell cast at them may regains volition; at least until the next time the sorcerer re-establishes 

167



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

Kratos wields his Dominate (Reptiles) spell to command a lizardman raiding party of the Lo Swamps to serve him. With this subservient force, the sorcerer plans his revenge 

against Meeros. 

concentration. Dominate does not grant any awareness of what the The target of the spell may be an object, location or person — 
target is doing when beyond the perception of the sorcerer. In addi- although the latter, if unwilling, may also attempt to resist. If suc- 
tion, if the target escapes the Range of the spell they are freed from cessful the target throws off the curse, and the spell fails. 
control, although it can established again if they return. Although the magic may seem extremely potent, it is balanced 

Certain circumstances permit a new resistance roll to break the by the amount of time required to gather together creatures from 
spell, such as acts which run contrary to the target’s strongest beliefs overly long distances. In addition, interfering with nature on a wide 
or instincts, for example being forced to murder a loved one. In these scale often results in unforeseen (and dire) consequences. Thus Draw 
cases the subjugated victim may resist using a Passion, Oath or some is most often used for things like: pestering an individual with insects, 
similarly relevant skill. Suicidal commands instantly break the spell. clandestinely stealing an entire herd of cattle, or blighting a city with 

a plague of rats. 
DRrraAww (CCRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs)) 

Resust (Wallpower) EnNCchHAaNnTt (OOBbJjEeCcTt)) 
Draw summons creatures of a specific type within range towards Resist (Special) 

a target. Each variant of the spell affects a family of species, such Enchant enables a caster to make one of their sorcery spells ever- 
as fish, felines or birds. It affects creatures up to a maximum SIZ of lasting, but at the cost of seriously reducing their magical strength. 
three times the spell’s Intensity, which may resist the summons using Normally enchantments are bound into inanimate objects, some- 
Willpower. Those that fail are drawn towards the target, moving at a thing which will last beyond the life of the sorcerer, perhaps even 
natural speed suitable to that type of creature. becoming a legendary object. On the other hand a living target can 

Physical obstructions may prevent the creatures from reaching be enchanted, although the spell is often one of a deleterious nature. 
the desired location. Upon their arrival, some other magic must be A spell which is to be made perpetual must be Combined with 
used to control the creatures since Draw provides no protection or the casting of Enchant. In addition, it is limited to possessing only as 
domination against them. Aggressive species may potentially ram- many points of shaping as the Intensity of the Enchant. The strain 
page or mindlessly attack depending on their natural instincts. of creating the enchantment permanently reduces the sorcerer’s 

Magic Points attribute by the magic point cost of the combined spell. 
These can be recovered later if the enchantment is unwoven by the 

168



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

HY NCHANT? ENnSsLlAaVvEe (CCRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs)) 
Why Enchant?

Resist (Willpower) 
Few player character sorcerers are likely to create enchantments since 

Enslave grants the sorcerer power to manipulate large numbers 
the ultimate cost always comes from their own Magic Points attribute. 

of targets, all of whom must be of the same species as specified by 
Although it may seem foolish to enchant objects or people with permanent 

the spell. Instead of crushing the will of its victims, turning them 
spells due to this crippling reduction in power, there are some circumstances 

into helpless automatons (as per the Dominate spell), the magic 
where it can actually be a reasonable act. 

instils a powerful yet wholly artificial zeal or desire within those 
In magically poor settings, recovery of Magic Points may be slow and 

which it affects — giving them a temporary Passion at a value equal 
difficult. An enchanted object in this case, will actually save the sorcerer 

to the caster’s Invocation skill. This can be anything from devoted 
from expending power, especially of it is a spell which he uses regularly — a 

adoration towards the sorcerer to an unremitting hatred for a hith- 
canpet enchanted with Fly for instance. 

erto friendly nation. 
Progression in a magical guild or cult might require the creation of an 

The potential number of victims a sorcerer can Enslave is equal 
enchantment, a wizard’s staff” being a common concept. Combining this 

to ten times the Intensity of the spell, multiplied by its Targets com- 
with the right spell could create a dangerous weapon of sorcery (Wrack), 

ponent; thus if cast at Intensity 7 with four Targets, the spell will 
grant a supplementary pool of Magic Points (Store Manna), or some other 

actually attempt to affect 280 victims. These are normally gathered 
imaginative use. 

in a crowd or restricted area so that both the sorcerer can see them, 
Last but by no means least, a sorcerer can use an enchantment to bless 

and they can hear him. The sorcerer can only enslave creatures with 
or curse a victim with a persustent effect. A rather infamous example would 

an INT or INS up to twice the spell’s Intensity. Those that fail to 
be changing a prince into a baboon with a permanent Shapechange spell, 

resist will listen to the words of the sorcerer and be influenced by 
although with the right shaping entire cities could be damned with some 

them. 
nefarious sorcery. 

Whilst under the influence of this spell, victims cannot directly 

- 4 harm the caster, thinking him sacrosanct or a fount of wisdom. 
However they can baulk at a command if the order brings them 

original caster or the object (or person) is destroyed. Dismissing or 
into conflict with another Passion of equal or higher value. Enslave 

Neutralising an enchantment only suppresses its powers temporarily. 
is normally used by powerful sorcerers to raise armies, subjugate 

Itis recommended that only objects be permitted to be enchanted 
tribes or corrupt ruling bodies, enabling them to subtly seize power 

with spells requiring the Concentration trait. Enchantments should 
or ensure their own safety in an otherwise hostile society. 

be recorded with the Invocation skill of the enchanted spell at the 
time of its creation, along with whatever shaping was performed. 

Evoke 
EnNHhAaNnCcEe (CCHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCc)) Resust (Wallpower) 

Evoke brings an extra-planar being to the presence of the caster; 
Resist (Willpower/ Endurance) 

which can be anything from a demon or genie, to an intangible spirit. 
Enhance allows a sorcerer to increase a physical or mental trait 

The only requirements are that it cannot be native to the plane of 
of a target. It works in precisely the same way as Diminish, save that 

existence to which it is summoned, that it does not possess a POW 
it improves a specific characteristic, enhancing it by 2 points per 

greater than three times the spell’s Intensity, and that the sorcerer 
Intensity of the spell — to a maximum of twice the original charac- 

knows its true name. For some settings, each incidence of this spell 
teristic value. Malevolent use of the spell may be resisted. 

might be specific to a unique individual. 
Careful consideration should be taken before permitting charac- 

Although Evoke may summon the entity, it does not grant him 
ters access to certain versions of this spell, such as Enhance (DEX, 

any power over the extra-planar being. Unless some sort of magical 
INT or POW), due to the potentially unbalancing nature of these 

protection or compulsion is used, the sorcerer is completely at the 
spells. 

mercy of the entity, relying on ritual tradition or good nature. Of 

ENnLlAaRrGgEe 
Resust (Special) SuUmMMmOoNnIiNnGg OTtHhEeRrWwOoRrLlDd ENnTtIiTtIiEeSs 
Enlarge is the opposite of the Shrink spell. It is used to expand Using Evoke to summon entities from other worlds or dimensions us 

non-living or inanimate objects, the initial SIZ of which cannot one of those spells which, according to the genre, commonly requires a 
exceed a maximum of three times the spell’s Intensity. Under its great deal of preparation as described in the Introduction to Magic chapter 
effect, the dimensions and weight of the object are multiplied by a (see Ritualistic Casting Times page 115). 
factor equal to the Intensity. For instance a plank of wood subject to 1In this particular case, the Games Master could require that the initial 
an Intensity 7 Enlarge spell it would grow to seven times its length summoning of the entily requires roleplaying a long drawn out ritual, with 
and mass, possibly allowing it to form a bridge. JSfull descriptions of the laying down of protective wards, and any required 

Normally objects cannot resist the magic, but if it is carried or sacrifices. Then, assuming the summoned creature doesn’t just destroy the 
worn by a living creature, then the victim may resist the spell with sorcerer or drag him back to its own realm, some form of negotiation 
Endurance. Used offensively in this way, the creature has the chance should take placefor future services. 
to brace itself or simply drop the object as it expands. Thus whilst Once thus deal is struck the entity could be allowed to return home, 
having a suit of mail grow to five times bigger and heavier may be a ready to respond the next time it is called by the Evoke spell. However, 
hindering inconvenience, it will not cause direct harm. Additionally, these_future summonings merely require the sorcerer to call out the being’s 
an object will stop growing when it meets too much resistance. name whilst casting the spell, allowing it to respond near instantaneously. 

- 4 

169



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

course the being may not necessarily attack or punish its summoner, HIinNDdEeRr 
but few are happy about being yanked from their native plane with- Resust (Endurance) 
out some sort of suitable raison d’étre or a gift to smooth ruffled Hinder reduces the Movement Rate of whatever itis cast on, in a 
feelings. similar manner to Haste. The spell can affect targets of up to a max- 

Summoned entities only remain in the world for as long as the imum SIZ of three times the spell’s Intensity. Those that fail to resist 
Duration of the spell. In addition they cannot travel further from the are slowed by a number of metres equal to the Intensity. However, a 
place of their summoning than the spell’s Range. target’s Movement Rate cannot be lowered to less than 1 metre per 

round with this spell. 
Frly 

Concentration HooOLldDFfaASsTt 
Fly enables the recipient to move freely through the air at their Resust (Endurance) 

own behest. The spell can affect a person, creature or object of a SIZ Holdfast magically adheres an object (of a SIZ up to three times 
up to three times its Intensity, granting them a base Movement Rate the spell’s Intensity) to another surface. The bonding is unbreakable 
of 6. Further levels of Intensity not allocated to SIZ can instead be by normal means, save for the destruction of the target or the sur- 
used to augment the speed of flight, each point granting an addi- face it is bonded to. It can only be dispelled by magic if the counter 
tional 6 metres per round. For instance an Intensity 7 Fly spell could spell can overcome the Magnitude of the Holdfast. 
grant a SIZ 14 creature a Movement Rate whilst flying of 18. The materials of the two surfaces make no difference to the 

Fly requires concentration only when actively moving. If concen- spell. However, if the target is a living being, it is permitted to resist 
tration lapses the magic continues, keeping the recipient hovering using its Endurance. This magic is often used to seal doors into 
aloft; although if travelling at high speed it might take a round or their frames, stick weapons into scabbards, or even fasten thieves to 
two to coast to a stop. objects they were trying to steal! 

If the spell is used on a beast of burden or an object used to sup- 
port others (such as a carpet) it must be capable of lifting the com- ImMPpRrIisSoOnN 
bined SIZ of both the creature or object, and those mounted upon Resist (Willpower) 
it. Otherwise it either fails to take off, or sinks towards the ground at Imprison creates an invisible barrier around a person or creature, 
a rate deemed fitting by the Games Master. blocking it from leaving the area. The magic only affects corporeal 

beings with a maximum POW or SIZ of up to three times the spell’s 
HAaSsTtEe Intensity. If either characteristic exceeds the limit the spell fails. The 

Haste augments the Movement Rate of whatever it is cast on, imprisoned creature is permitted a single chance to resist. If they 
whether a person, creature or object. The spell can affect targets up successfully overcome the magic, they can escape. 
to a maximum SIZ of three times the Intensity of the spell. Under Depending on the setting, Imprison may require the area of the 
its effect, the recipient’s Movement Rate is increased by an amount imprisonment to be pre-prepared with use of powders, glyphs or 
equal to the Intensity. If the target is an inanimate object, it increases geometric designs. It is often combined with the Evoke spell to pro- 
the top speed of the vehicle or vessel, but does not provide motive vide some degree of protection when summoning hostile entities. 
power. 

InNtTuUIitTiIoOnN 
HiiDdEe LifFe Concentration, Resust (Wallpower) 

Hide Life conceals the recipient’s soul in a specially prepared Intuition permits the sorcerer to discern the true emotions and 
object called a soul jar, which can take any form the caster desires. motives of the target, as if he had made a successful Insight roll. 
It works only on targets with a maximum POW of up to twice the The spell can only affect targets with an INT up to twice its Inten- 
Intensity of the spell. Under its effects the recipient loses a single Hit sity. Although the magic allows a deeper awareness of psychological 
Point from every location, but in exchange cannot be killed. Fach state, it does not enable the sorcerer to read memories or guarded 
time they suffer an injury, affliction or spell which would normally thoughts. Targets who are aware of the spell may try to veil their 
slay them, at the moment of death their body discorporates and feelings, gaining another resistance roll against the caster’s Invoca- 
reforms next to the object in which the life force is stored. tion skill, each time they try to deflect the sorcerer’s probing. 

It takes the body a period of one month divided by the Intensity 
of the spell to fully reform and heal. Conversely, if the recipient MAaRrKk 
ventures further away from its soul jar than the Range of the spell, it Resist (Willpower) 
begins to degenerate, suffering damage in reverse. Dying beyond the Mark is used to magically tag an object with a mystical sigil, so 
reach of the spell is permanent. that it may be located, summoned or even targeted by another spell 

Hide Life can be dismissed or neutralised, but requires the count- without being in range of the caster’s perception. The magic can 
er-magic to be cast directly onto the soul jar, which is normally well mark an object of a SIZ up to three times the spell’s Intensity. Whilst 
hidden or protected. The only other way of ending the spell is to the caster is within the Range of the spell, he is aware of the object’s 
smash the object itself, which may prove hard if it is carved or fash- distance and direction. Whether or not the magical mark is visible 
ioned out of exceptionally durable material. Although Hide Life depends on the setting, but once placed it cannot be removed until 
prevents death, it does not cease ageing, as many sorcerers who later the spell ends. If cast upon a living creature, it may attempt to resist 
become withered liches have discovered to their cost. the effects of the spell. 

170



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

MyyssTtiic (SeEnNSsEe)) PhHAanNtToOmM (SSeEnNSsEe) 
Concentration Concentration, Resust (Special) 
Mystic (Sense) enables the caster to perceive magic using the Phantom produces an illusory effect on a target, tailored to fool a 

sense of perception as specified by the spell. This could take the specific sense. There are many versions of this spell, each one affect- 
form of seeing auras, hearing faint tinkling, smelling peculiar scents ing a different type of perception. The most common are used to 
or even feeling his skin crawl. subvert sight, sound, smell, taste and touch; but others exist to fool 

Due to the diversity of senses, the magical object need not be in more exotic senses such as temperature, magic or emotion. Several 
direct perception, but less precise sensory methods may make it dif- phantasm spells can be woven together to form a single illusion, 
ficult exactly to locate the source. The power of Mystic (Sense) per- using the Combine component. 
mits it to extend into alternate planes, for example the Spirit World, Illusions produced by the Phantom spell confuse the senses of 
if such exist in the setting. those who interact with them, but do not change the underlying 

The sorcerer will be able roughly to judge the Magic Points reality hidden beneath. As such, phantasms cannot inflict direct 
of objects and people to within 1d3 points. If observing a spell or harm, but can be indirectly dangerous. For example a visual illusion 
enchantment with an Intensity equal or less than that of the sorcer- of a paved floor could hide the existence of a spiked pit beneath it, 
er’s Mystic (Sense), he may discern what the type of magic (Theistic, or the smell and taste of a deadly acid could be hidden under the 
Mystic, etc), what it does, and the unique signature of whichever illusory bouquet of fine wine. 
cult, guild or tradition cast it — or if already a member of that group, Of course, illusions need not be used to hide danger but could 
the individual. intimidate or bluff instead. The same visual illusion could make a 

pony appear to be a deadly sabre-toothed tiger, or turn the rags of a 
NEeUuTtRrAaLlIiSsEe MAaGgIiCc beggar into princely robes. 

Neutralise Magic suppresses a single spell or miracle on a target, Detecting an illusion is not normally permitted unless the 
with a Magnitude equal or less than its own. The magic is negated observer has good reason to question its validity. The audible and 
only as long as the Duration of Neutralise Magic, which in most visual phantasm of a tiger cast on a pony will fool almost anyone, yet 
cases is more than enough time for the targeted spell to expire. a dog witnessing the same illusion would notice that the tiger smelled 
Magic with a longer duration reinstates itself when Neutralise ends, very strongly of horse, and would have a strong suspicion that it was 
thus it cannot be used to permanently negate long-running curses or not all it seemed. In such cases the observer may attempt to resist 
break enchantments for example, but could be used to briefly bring using their Willpower against the Invocation skill of the caster. Resis- 
relief or bypass them. tance rolls are also permitted if the phantasm attempts to aggres- 

If used against spells or miracles which specifically protect against sively overwhelm those subject to its illusory effects (see below). 
magic (such as Spell Protection or Reflect), Neutralise Magic takes Phantasms can react to their surroundings provided the sorcerer 
precedence in those situations when the Magnitude of both is equal. concentrates on the spell. If the caster’s attention lapses the illusion 

Neutralise Magic can be used defensively to negate incoming enters a relatively static standby mode, still operant but not longer 
spells using the Counter Spell reactive action. It affects targets with dynamically responding to the environment; so background noises, 
a SIZ up to three times the Intensity of the spell. scents and such like rarely need to be concentrated on. 

Tor instance casting the phantasm of a tiger out of thin air 
PAaLlsy 

would require the caster to concentrate to make it move or respond 
Resist (Endurance) 

to attacks; whereas casting the same phantasm on the pony would 
Palsy renders a single random Hit Location on the target com- need no concentration, since all he has done is changed its external 

pletely useless, the affected area twitching and unresponsive. The 
appearance, and the animal will move by itself — although cropping 

precise effect depends on the location struck. Being hit in the head 
grass and fleeing at the first sign of danger might be giveaways. 

causes the victim to become completely incapacitated, the chest 
Phantom can only be used to replicate senses and memories pre- 

results in paralysis from the neck down, the abdomen paralysis from 
viously experienced by the caster, or things he can mentally imagine. 

the waist down, and a limb simply ceases functioning. Thus a sorcerer could create some horrific looking monster with a 
The spell cannot affect Hit Locations which normally possess Hit 

hundred eyes, but correctly mimicking the taste of Fireberry Juice 
Points greater than the Palsy’s Intensity. Nor can a single casting of 

may be beyond his ability if he hasn’t already sampled it. Such 
the spell be used to target multiple locations on the same victim. 

minor oversights are often a good way of recognising phantasms. 
The following guidelines are provided to help judge the effects of 

PEeRrCcEeIivVEe (SeEnNSsEe) 
particular sensory illusions: 

Resist (Endurance) 
Perceive grants the recipient a new and unusual sensory percep- 

SiIgGhHTt 
tion. This could be anything from Echolocation to X-Ray Vision. 

Creates a visible yet non-corporeal illusion which cannot exceed 
The recipient cannot exceed a SIZ more than three times the spell’s 

a length, height or width of more than the Intensity of the spell in 
Intensity and if unwilling, may resist. Each version of the spell 

metres. This can range from simply changing the colour of a door to 
relates to a single unique sense, which can be made up by the Games creating a carpet of aggressive, multicoloured snakes which continu- 
Master or chosen from the Creature Traits table. ally wriggle over each other. If used subtly; a visual illusion can help 

Depending on the setting, the spell may strangely mutate existing disguise the true appearance of an object or creature, changing skin 
Sensory organs, or grow exotic new ones, such as giant bat-like ears, tones or the pattern of clothing, Creating a fabrication completely 
delicate antennae or even glowing slit eyes — potentially causing dis- out of context with the setting allows the viewer a chance to resist, 
trust, fear or nausea to observers. 

171



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

as does physically interacting with it. Animate illusionary creatures However, the portal only remains open for as long as the sorcerer 
use the relevant skills of the sorcerer to perform physical actions; for concentrates. If his attention lapses, the portal remains in place, but 
example, an illusionary giant spider attempting to avoid a thrown is impassable. 
javelin would use the sorcerer’s own Evade skill to scuttle clear. The appearance of the portal usually depends on the setting. 

Games Masters should decide whether a portal terminus can be 
SmMEeLlLl placed blindly, whether it relies on close personal familiarity with 

Reproduces any single scent of something, from a pleasant per- the chosen location, or requires use of other magic such as Project 
fume to the stench of vomit or the smell of cut grass to freshly cooked (Sense) or Mark. 
food. The illusory scent has a detectable radius in metres (to humans Conversely portals may require a specially enchanted spot or 
at least) equal to the Intensity of the spell. When used creatively, the object to function, such as a set of standing stones. Another consid- 
smell can drive off those who find the odour unpleasant, or cause eration is whether sensory information can pass through the portal 
them to involuntarily gag or choke. Conversely the scent might draw as if it were a window to another place, or if the surface remains 
the attention of persons or creatures who find it attractive. mysteriously opaque. 

SoOuUnNDd PRrOoJjEecCTt (SeEnNSsEe)) 
Generates an audible illusion, anything from a faint, distract- Concentration 

ing whisper to an overwhelming clap of thunder. The sorcerer can Project allows the recipient to send one of his senses beyond his 
influence the nature and volume of the sound so long as he con- body in the form of an astral projection. This discorporated ‘recep- 
tinues to concentrate upon it. Although very loud sounds can be tor’ is both invisible and intangible, permitting it to travel anywhere 
produced, the illusion cannot cause permanent deafhess or damage. with no chance of observation save for those with magical percep- 
On the other hand the volume can be high enough to interfere with tion. Each individual Project spell relates to a specific sense, which 
verbal communication, or hide the sounds of other things happen- is not necessarily limited to just human perceptions. A sorcerer who 
ing. Treat the volume to be equal to ten times the Intensity on the knows several of these spells can Combine them together, clairvoy- 
Decibel scale. Any task which requires hearing one’s own voice or ance and clairaudience for example. 
maintaining concentration (such as spell casting), can attempt to Wherever the projected sense travels, it relays back its particular 
resist, or suffer the usual consequences. sensory information, allowing the recipient to see, listen, touch or so 

on via the receptor. Whilst one of his senses is projected in this way, 
TAasTtEe 

the recipient can no longer use it with his physical body. So a sor- 
Produces any taste the sorcerer has previously encountered, from 

cerer who projects his hearing off to a distant location becomes deaf 
the most subtle of flavourings to mouth fouling tangs. The target of 

until the spell ends or he brings the projected sense back. 
this spell need not just be food or drink, although that it is primary Concentration is required for two aspects of the spell: moving 
focus. It can be used to make the skin of a lover taste like lemon zest the astral receptor, and attempting a Perception check with the pro- 
or be applied to a knife so that whatever it cuts is tainted with the jected sense. Relatively speaking the sense moves quite slowly, with 
flavour of rotted fish sauce. Using this spell offensively is somewhat 

a maximum speed of ten times the spell’s Intensity in kilometres per 
difficult, but it might be utilised to cause a faux pas; forcing some- 

hour. When focus lapses, the receptor remains static but it keeps on 
one to spit something out unexpectedly; or perhaps make somebody 

relaying ambient information. If for any reason the projected sense 
abandon a complete meal, allowing the caster to claim it for himself. 

is detected, it can be dispelled or even attacked with a magically 

ToucHh 
Creates an illusion of tactility, which when combined with other DEeAaTthH fFrRoOmM AFfAaRr 

types of phantasm can grant them a greater degree of reality. The Although Project (Sense) s oflen used to search or spy from remote 
sense imposed can range from feathery tickles to resilient impact, et secure locations, its main advantage is that it enables a sorcerer to cast 
although in truth there is nothing actually there. So a target could spells at extreme Range, ostensibly safe from reprisal. Whlst this may 
be goosed from afar or the bite of a phantasmal tiger given crush- seem the perfect way lo curse or assassinate a victim (and indeed s a staple 
ing force. Indeed the spell is so versatile it can be used to replace of the Sword & Sorcery genre), there are certain dfficulties with using it 
the painful lash of a whip with the sense of being gently caressed. in this manner. 
Such sensations simply fool those that interact with target, thus the Fastly there is no guarantee the sorcerer will actually know the precise 
spell cannot inflict, and is itself immune to, damage. Victims may location of hus intended victim. Of course the location of a public figure 
still believe they have been wounded (or not as the case may be), such as a king may be guessed at, but it stull might take some time to_find 
and must resist the spell to avoid psychosomatic effects of receiving has exact position, especially if he lacks a regular schedule. Once a victim 
wounds, even though they have not suffered any actual harm. discovers he s being magically hunted it would be easy to hide or move 

somewhere unforeseen by his hunter, making it mgh tmpossible to locate 
POoRrTtAaLl by serying. 

Concentration Secondly, after extending the Range of a sorcery spell to reach tens or 
Portal creates a magical gateway connecting two places, which hundreds of kilometres, few Shaping points remain to augment its Mag- 

when stepped through, allows instantaneous transportation between nitude; meaning that even modest magical protection will block the attack. 
the caster’s side to the terminus, which may be located anywhere Tus 15 espectally true for places such as temple sanctuares or wizard’s 
within Range. The portal is large enough for objects or creatures lowers which tend to be warded against such magical assaulls. 
with a SIZ up to three times the spell’s Intensity to pass through. - 4 

172



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

augmented weapon or spell —which if successful, transfers the mag- REeVvIiVvIifFyY 
ical effect or damage back to the head of the recipient. Concentration 
A sorcerer can use Project (Sense) to be able to aim a second spell Revivify is used to animate a dead body, creating a mindless 

at a target who is out of direct observation —whether because of dis- undead automaton such as a skeleton or zombie. The spell requires 
tance or blocking obstacles. The piggy-backed spell must also have the relatively whole corpse of a dead creature in order to work, 
sufficient Range to reach the target, and cannot possess a greater although bodies can be assembled piecemeal from dismembered 
Intensity than that of the Project spell. parts of several less intact carcasses, provided time is spent stitching 

flesh or wiring bone together first. 
PRrOoTtEeCcTtIiVvEe WAaRrDd 

The sorcerer can revivify corpses with a maximum SIZ of three 
Protective Ward is an augmenting spell which must be cast in 

times the spell’s Intensity. The characteristics of the skeleton or zom- 
association with one or more other sorcery spells, using the Com- 

bie are as described in the Creatures chapter, but gain a bonus to 
bine component to meld them together. Its purpose is to form an 

STR and CON equal to the Intensity of the spell. All other attri- 
extended wall to which spells such as Damage Resistance, Spell 

butes are based on the original creature. 
Resistance or Spirit Resistance can be bound, so that the magic 

Being mindless, revivified undead rely on their creator to guide 
defends an area or volume, rather than individual targets. 

them. Thus they act with physical skills equivalent to those of the 
The ward can cover an area (or encompass a volume) of up to 

sorcerer (capped by the value of the caster’s Invocation skill), but if 
1 metre per point of Intensity in width, height and depth. Thus an 

he allows his concentration to relax, they lapse into quiescence until 
Intensity 6 Protective Ward could be used to create a simple wall 6 

actively guided again. Nothing prevents the sorcerer from further 
metres wide, a trapezoid pyramid measuring 6m along each verti- 

augmenting the undead servitor with other magic or arming it, pro- 
ces, or even a hemisphere 6m in diameter. As preparation before it 

vided it has the physiology to wear or wield such items. 
is cast, the ward must be inscribed upon a solid surface, its sigils or 
lines either drawn, scratched or etched along the perimeter of the 
area so protected. 

When cast, the sorcerer decides in which direction the ward is 
permeable, if any. Thus a warding could be set up to affect anything 
entering the warded area, or conversely anything leaving it. In cer- 
tain circumstances the caster may wish that the magics woven into 
the perimeter work in both directions. 

REeGgEeNnEeRrAaTtEe 
Concentration 
Regenerate allows the sorcerer to slowly heal injuries by accel- 

erating the natural healing processes of the target. The magic will 
counteract bleeding and stabilise a dying target, but cannot repair 
Major Wounds. Targets regenerate a number of Hit Points per hour 
equal to the Intensity of the spell. These points may be divided 
across several locations or all applied to one location at the will of 
the caster. However, the sorcerer must actively concentrate on the 
spell for healing to occur. If concentration lapses or the spell is ter- 
minated early, the amount of Hit Points recovered is proportional to 
the time spent regenerating. 

REePpUuLlSsEe (CCRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs)) 
Resist (Willpower) 
Repulse is the exact opposite of the Draw spell (see page 168), 

driving off creatures of a specific type within range of the target. It 
has a range of useful applications, such as a personal insect repellent 
or purging homes of vermin. On a larger scale Repulse can keep 
villages clear of especially dangerous creatures, which might pose a 
threat to the inhabitants. As a curse it works well too, from driving 

ScuuLlppPtT (SSuUBbSstTaANnCcEe)) 
prey away from a hunter up to the damning of entire cities by repel- 

Concentration, Resust (Special) 
ling people from entering their forbidding gates! 

Sculpt enables a sorcerer to mould the form of a particular sub- 
The precise nature of the repulsion is left to the caster to decide. 

stance, shaping it to his will. Each variant of the spell affects a specific 
It takes the form of some emotive response, for example disgust, 

type of substance, which can be fairly inclusive, for instance sand, 
nervousness or outright terror. 

stone, water, metal, and so on. The sorcerer can sculpt a volume 
or object with a maximum SIZ of three times the spell’s Intensity. 
Insubstantial substances such as smoke, shadows or mist are instead 
measured in terms of cubic metres equal to the spell’s Intensity. 

173



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

Concentration is only required to actively shape the substance, For example, a sorcerer of SIS 10 who wishes to change into a lion (average 
the spell maintaining the new form until the next change the sor- SIZ 22), requires a Shapechange of Intensity 8; whereas if the same sorcerer 
cerer wishes to make. At the conclusion of the spell the substance wished to turn into a rat (average SIZ 1), he would only need an Intensity of 7. 
will retain its final form, provided the material is rigid. For instance There are many variants of Shapechange, each one specific 
a hole opened in a wall would remain, but a statue moulded out of to a species of creature. The categories are quite broad in scope, 
water would collapse. however, covering an entire family: for example: rodents, canines, 

Although sculpt can create any form imaginable, the actual artis- snakes, etc. To change into a Wyvern, for example, one would need 
tic value or architectural strength of the new shape is limited by the Shapechange (Draconic); assuming the sorcerer had sufficient Inten- 
appropriate Craft or Engineering skill; thus a sorcerer who tried to sity to achieve the new form. The spell only works on living things, 
repair the hull of a ship with this spell would only be as effective as which may resist if they are unwilling. 
his Craft (Carpentry), albeit he’d need no tools, and could perform 
the task in mere moments. ShHRrIinNkK 

If the targeted object is carried or worn by a living creature, then Resist (Special) 

they may resist the spell with Endurance. Whilst the spell can be Shrink is used to miniaturise non-living or inanimate objects, the 

used to discommode/break such objects, their manipulation cannot SIZ of which cannot exceed a maximum of three times the spell’s 

be used to directly inflict harm on the creature (see Shrink, opposite). Intensity. The manner in which objects decrease their proportions is 

Exotic versions of this spell can be used on living substances, different to the Diminish spell, since objects targeted with this magic 

provided the spell can affect the entire plant or creature. Unwilling may be quite small and light. Instead Shrink reduces their dimen- 

targets may attempt to resist. No damage is inflicted on those that sions and weight by a factor equal to the Intensity. For example a 

fail, but their physique and appearance may be warped as the sor- broad sword has a default SIZ of 1, but if subject to an Intensity 8 

cerer desires. Shrink spell it would be reduced to an eighth of its length and mass, 
making it much easier to conceal. 

SensEe (OOBbJjEeCcTt,, STtaATtEe oORr SUuBbSsTtAaNnCcEe)) If the targeted object is carried or worn by a living creature, 
Concentration then they may resist the spell with Endurance. Otherwise the object 
Sense is utilised as a means to detect valuables, lost possessions or gets no save against the magic. When used offensively upon worn 

hidden objects from afar. Each incidence of this spell senses a spe- objects, the targeted item either tears open, squeezes off, or if it is 
cific type of object, physiological status or unique substance. Such too resilient to break, simply stops shrinking when it meets too much 
categories are usually quite broad, to ensure some degree of versa- resistance. So using Shrink on a soldier’s full helmet might miniatur- 
tility. Examples include precious metals, fresh water, weapons, flesh ise it to the point where it is painfully tight and impossible to remove, 
and bone, edible food, or even undeath. but it will not inflict any significant harm on its wearer. 

The caster must concentrate to detect his spell’s objective, which 
reveals its presence by tweaking one of the sorcerer’s primary senses. SmMOoTtHhEeRr 
Thus the location of water might be indicated by a gurgling, tinkling Resust (Endurance) 

noise which strengthens as the caster draws closer to its source. Smother slowly asphyxiates a target, starving it of air so that it 

Sufficient thickness of interposing material will block the spell, collapses choking and gasping. The magic affects targets with a SIZ 

which can penetrate a number of metres of solid wood, earth or up to three times the Intensity of the spell. Those that fail to resist 

water equal to the spell’s Intensity. Denser materials such as metal or begin to suffocate immediately, suffering damage at the start of the 

stone reduce this to a number of centimetres equal to the Intensity. next Round (see Asphyxiation page 71). The spell can also be used 

Penetrating magical protections require that the Intensity of Sense on flames to extinguish candles, lamps, and even fires of up to 1 

exceeds that of the protective spell. cubic metre per Intensity. 

Sense cannot discern more insubstantial things like emotions or Normally this spell ceases to inflict damage once the victim passes 

intents. out. Rarer versions possess more dire effects, actually filling the vic- 
tim’s lungs with water, blood, or even sand so that they actually die. 

ShHAaPpeEcChHaAnNGgEe (tToO CRrEeAaTtUuRrEe)) 
Resust (Endurance) SPpEeLlLl REeSsIisStTaAnNcCEe 
Shapechange morphs the physical body of the target into that of Spell Resistance provides the recipient protection against magic 

another species. The sorcerer can affect any living creature of a SIZ cast at them. It blocks incoming spells with a Magnitude equal to, 

up to three times the Intensity of the spell. The SIZ of the original or less than, its own. If a spell or miracle manages to overcome this 

form, added to the difference in SIZ between the original and mod- protection, the Spell Resistance suffers no harm, unless of course it 

ified form, must be within this range. itself was the target of magical dismissal. 

The magic transforms the target into an average example of the The negative side of Spell Resistance is that it cannot discern 

new species. He adopts the physical Characteristics (STR, CON, between friendly or hostile magic. Thus someone seriously wounded 

SIZ and DEX) of the creature assumed, plus whatever inherent under its protection may need to terminate the spell or be prevented 

attacks and modes of locomotion it possesses. The recipient may from receiving magical healing. Spell Resistance affects targets with 

use the creature’s base skills or his own, if they are better. Magical or a SIZ up to three times the Intensity of the spell. 

supernatural abilities are not granted, and nor are any of the mental 
SPpIirRIitT REeSsIisStTaAnNcCEe 

characteristics. 
Spirit Resistance blocks spirits and intangible entities of other 

planes from coming into contact with the recipient. The magic 

174



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

blocks spirits of an Intensity up to half the Intensity of the spell. Both the sorcerer and the target retain their own skills and men- 
Tor example, an Intensity 3 disease spirit would be blocked by an tal Characteristics, but gain the STR, CON; SIZ and DEX of the 
Intensity 5 or 6 Spirit Resistance. other’s body, which may require recalculation of some attributes. 
A blocked spirit is unable to touch, discorporate, possess or oth- Since this spell can be used upon creatures as well as sapient 

erwise engage the recipient in Spirit Combat. Likewise any magic beings, the sorcerer takes provisions to ensure his own body cannot 
cast by a spirit at the recipient is also blocked unless the Magnitude suffer harm from the temporary occupant; for instance by leaving it 
of the spell exceeds the Intensity of the Spirit Resistance. under the supervision of servants or magically binding himself into 

immobility. 
StToORrEe MAaNnNnAa If the sorcerer’s body is killed whilst switched with a victim, his 

Store Manna creates a temporary storage vessel for Magic Points, consciousness will also die when the spell ends. Using this spell a 
a reservoir which can charged, then later be called on to power the sorcerer could briefly escape the death of their own body in order 
sorcerer’s own spells. It requires an object to be the target of the to wreak revenge. Casting Switch Body as an Enchantment (see 
spell in which the Magic Points are physically stored. This can be Enchant, page 168) can technically allow a sorcerer permanently to 
anything from an eggshell to an iron idol, but more delicate objects inhabit the body of a target and assume its status or influence, if he 
can be prone to breakage. The object can store a maximum number can carry off the exchange. 
of Magic Points equal to the Intensity of the spell. Travelling further 
from this object than the Range of the spell cuts the sorcerer off TaPp (CCHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCc)) 
from his Magic Points. Resist (Special) 

When initially cast, Store Manna has no Magic Points of its Tap is used to drain Characteristic points from victims in order to 
own. These must be transferred from other sources; such as vol- boost sorcerer’s own, potentially achieving superhuman levels. Each 
untary donations from other sorcerers. Depending on the setting, version of the Tap spell affects a different characteristic. Targets 
Magic Points might also be gathered from ritual sacrifices, tapping may willingly submit to the spell or attempt to resist its effects, using 
of magical locations, and other more unusual methods (see Where Endurance if the spell is affecting a physical characteristic (STR, 
Do Magic Points Come From? Page 115). CON, SIZ or DEX) or Willpower if affecting a mental one (INT, 

If the spell expires, naturally coming to the end of its duration or POW or CHA). 
from being dispelled (or the object is broken), any remaining Magic The number of points drained from each target is equal to the 
Points stored within the object are lost. spell’s Intensity (down to a minimum of 1 point). The sorcerer how- 

The sorcerer can only benefit from a single casting of Store ever only gains one fifth of these points — up to a maximum of dou- 
Manna at a time, additional castings either not working or replac- ble his original characteristic value. For instance if a sorcerer cast 
ing the previous incidence of the spell. In addition, the application Tap (STR) at Intensity 7 on four targets, each of the victims would 
of the Targets component does not permit multiplication of the lose seven points of STR whilst the sorcerer’s own strength would be 
Magic Point storage, but simply allows the default number to be split augmented by +6 points. 
between multiple objects. Once the spell concludes, the characteristic points of all involved 

revert to normal. Certain versions of this spell such as Tap (IN'T) or 
SuUmMmMOoNn Tap (DEX) can be very potent, especially if combined with Enchant. 

Resust (Evade) When using Tap to steal a creature’s SIZ, the magic causes the vic- 
Summon brings a non-living, inanimate object to the sorcerer, tim to become wasted and skeletal, rather than shrinking them. 

teleporting it from wherever it previously rested to his hand or body 
as desired. The magic can summon an object of a SIZ up to three TEeLleEpPaAtThHyY 
times the spell’s Intensity. Usually this is something he can directly Resist (Willpower) 
perceive with his own senses, although objects residing at greater Telepathy allows a sorcerer to establish mental two way commu- 
distances can be summoned via magical observation, or previously nication with a target, without the need for shared language or even 
prepared with the Mark spell. species. The caster can form the telepathic link with beings of an 

If the object is something in the possession of a living creature, INT up to twice the Intensity of the spell. Non-sapient creatures use 
it may attempt to resist the magical theft by snatching it back or their INT equivalent and not their INS. In this case, communication 
diving away. This spell is often used to call forth prepared equip- is limited to the exchange of mental pictures or emotions. 
ment the sorcerer does not wish to carry, or to arm himself in a The spell also grants the ability to experience memory, if the tar- 
moment’s notice. Clothing and armour must be prior mounted on get is willing to share it. If cast on multiple targets, the sorcerer can 
a mannequin for it to be instantly settled about the sorcerer’s body. decide if everyone connected via the Telepathy can communicate 
When the spell ends the object returns to the precise location it was freely, or whether he acts as a hub for numerous private links. 
summoned from. 

TEeLleEpPoORrTt 
SwiitchH Bopdy Concentration, Resist (Evade) 

Resist (Willpower) Teleport enables a sorcerer to instantaneously move the recipi- 
Switch Body enables a sorcerer to switch his consciousness with ent anywhere within the Range of the spell. Several limiting factors 

that of another, so that they exchange bodies. The caster can affect apply to this transportation, these being that the destination is in 
targets with a POW up to twice the Intensity of the spell. Unwilling direct observation (or tagged by the Mark spell), there is solid footing 
targets who fail to resist become host to the caster’s mind, and their and no object bars their arrival; otherwise the spell automatically 
own psyche finds itself in the sorcerer’s body. fails. A sorcerer is limited to teleporting creatures with a SIZ up to 

175



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

three times the Intensity The effect of the spell 
of the spell. depends on the substance 

Although the spell per- it was converted to. A solid 
mits contiguous jumping material such as gold will 
until its Duration expires, place a living victim into 
the recipient is forced to a state of suspended ani- 
teleport back to its origin mation which lasts until 
before selecting a new the sorcery terminates. 
destination to travel to. Unless defaced, the tempo- 
Fach jump is treated as rary golden statue reverts 
a Reactive Action requir- back to its original form 
ing the expenditure of unharmed. If the substance 
an Action Point, and can was ice or salt on the other 
be used to avoid attacks hand, some wearing might 
in an opposed roll in a occur due to abrasive winds 
similar fashion to Evade. or melting. 
When the spell ends or Being transformed into 
is dismissed, the recipi- a fluid substance usually 
ent returns to his starting spells doom for the original 
point. This occurs even if target. Objects converted 
he is dead. to sand or water collapse 

Teleport can be fur- under their own weight 
ther limited by requiring and may disperse entirely. 
the presence of a certain Those transmogrified into 
material or substance at more viscous substances 
cither end of the jump, often deform, and living 
through which to pass. creatures which emerge 
Tor example a sorcerer alive from such an expe- 
may only be able to rience are often horribly 
pass from one shadow warped or mutated by the 
to another. Likewise this experience. 
could be pools of water, Whilst it can be used as 
burning fires or even liv- a horrible curse, transmog- 

Kratos's Wrack (Darkness) spell easily overwhelms a Meerish champion. His pain is caused by 
ing trees! ethereal serpents that bite and tea; their venom inflictingfreezing agony. rify is normally used in more 

productive (or at least inven- 
TRrAaNnSsFfEerR WOoUuNnDd tive) ways, anything from trick- 

Concentration, Resust (Endurance) ing merchants to undermining fortifications. Games Masters should 
Transfer Wound allows a sorcerer to transfer physical damage restrict this spell to only the most foul sorcerers if it is likely to be 

from himself to the target or vice versa. By spending an Action Point abused for the purpose of killing. 
and concentrating on his Turn he may move a single wound of dam- 
age equal or less than the spell’s Intensity between the target and TrRaApP SouLl 
himself. Resist (Willpower) 

Wounds must be shifted between identical or at least roughly Trap Soul snares the spirit of a corporeal creature so that at the 
similar locations, which cause the spell to fail if cast on a target moment of its death, it can be trapped within a specially prepared 
with alien physiology. When the spell ends, transferred wounds object or location. The magic can affect targets with a POW up to 
remain where they were last shifted. If multiple targets are incorpo- twice the Intensity of the spell. Unwilling targets may attempt to 
rated, then damage transferred from the sorcerer is divided equally resist nefarious use of this spell. 
between each recipient. Only those beings that die before the Trap Soul spell ends, and 

whilst still within its Range have their souls imprisoned, unable to 
TRrAaNnSsMmOoGgRrIiFfYy (tToO SuUBbSsTtaANnCcEe)) depart for the spirit world or afterlife until the object containing 

Resist (Endurance) them is destroyed, or the spell concludes. 
Transmogrify converts the base substance of a creature or object Whilst held within their prison, the soul is unable to communi- 

to some other material. Each variant of the spell converts targets cate, unless contacted by magic with a Intensity greater than the 
to a specific type of substance, which can be as broad or narrow as Trap Soul’s Magnitude. Sorcerers specialising in necromancy often 
is suitable for the setting, for example salt, mud or even gold! The combine this spell with Enchant to create immortal oracles, to eter- 
sorcerer can transmogrify a target with a maximum SIZ of three nally imprison deadly enemies, or to bind the soul of a slain victim 
times the spell’s Intensity. Living creatures and magical constructs to its own place of death or body, where it endures as a Haunt (see 
are permitted to resist. page 150). 

176



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  SoORrCcEeRrYy 

UNnDdEeAaTthH 
Resist (Endurance) 
Undeath enables the sorcerer to turn the recipient into an undead 

monster, gaining the ability to forgo air, food, water, warmth or rest; 
to experience immunity to disease and poison; and no longer to suf- 
fer the adverse effects of Serious Wounds, fatigue or ageing. In effect 
they gain the Undead creature trait. All this comes at a cost however; 
whilst under the effect of the magic, the recipient is infertile, no 
longer heals, and is incapable of generating Magic Points naturally. 

The sorcerer can affect living targets with a CON up to three 
times the Intensity of the spell. Unwilling targets may attempt to 
resist. Sorcerers who fear death often resort to this spell, and com- 
bine it with Enchant to make it permanent, turning themselves into 
an immortal lich or mummy. Occasionally it is used to impart a 
terrible curse on those that transgress cult taboos or some equally 
heinous crime. 

WRrAaCcKk (SSuUbBsStTaAnNCcEe oORr HAaRrMm)) 
Concentration, Resust (Evade) 
Wrack enables a sorcerer to harm opponents with deadly bolts 

or waves of sorcerous energy. On his Turn as a Combat Action, he 
may launch a magical attack against the target or targets, using his 
Invocation skill as the attack roll, which may be resisted with Evade. 
Successful attacks strike a random location, the Intensity of the spell 
denoting the damage it inflicts. Worn armour does not protect, but 
natural or magical Armour Points reduce damage as normal. 

WRrAaCcKk DAaMmAaGgEe 

Intensity Damage 

1-2 1d2 

3-4 1d4 

5-6 1d6 

7-8 1d8 

9-10 1d10 

11-12 2d6 

The caster must concentrate to launch a Wrack attack, but can 
let the spell drop into dormancy to perform other actions in-between 
cach magical assault. 

Each variant of this spell inflicts damage in a different manner, 
according to the school from which it was learned. For example 
Wrack (Darkness) taught by the Stygian Path would strike the tar- 
get with serpent-like tendrils of freezing shadow, whereas Wrack 
(Death) learned from the Guardians of the Grave, may cause a vic- 
tim’s limbs to rot with necrotic lesions. 

177



Mythras:  Theism

| G S [ S L L I 11 K 7 K LU SO GO << A o IR UL AR | < < 

Theism

>, > 
=% X = A % &W = K 7 K I& A << A o B B T <= B = Gl 

T heism is the belief in, and worship of, godlike beings; it calls 
upon them to create supernatural effects on behalf of their CAaLlLlIinNgG oONn TthHEe GOoDdSs 

T faithful adherents. The precise manner in which this magic Calling upon the gods for their power relies upon two core skills, 
is provided, and how it manifests can vary dramatically according to Devotion and Exhort. Devotion reflects the strength and depth of 
the setting, but at its heart is the concept that worshippers appease the bond between the theist and his deity, or deities; whilst Exhort 
deities with gifts and devotion, in exchange for which the entity lends is the ability of the worshipper to correctly intonate or phrase his 
certain mortals, who have been initiated into its cult, the right to call requests, so that his divine patron will respond. 
upon a part of its power. 

Worshippers do not study the art of manipulating magic; rather 
DeevvooTtioonN (PPOOW+CHAA)) 

they learn the myths and secrets of those they venerate, gaining 
The nature and strength of any miraculous powers a theist draws 

insight into their nature, personalities and desires. With this knowl- 
upon is based upon his Devotion. The ‘skill’ is more accurately a 

edge a devoted worshipper knows how to phrase or frame a request 
relationship the theist has with an individual god, a small faction or 

to his gods, so that they feel compelled, or indeed inspired, to help 
family of divine beings, or indeed an entire pantheon. The precise 

him. 
scope of the skill depends upon the campaign setting, but each inci- 

Additionally a worshipper must show his dedication to his divine 
dence of Devotion must be assigned to a specific deity or group of 

patrons by offering sacrifice, service, and perhaps even selfless ado- 
deities. 

ration in order to prove himself worthy of their attention. The depth 
It is the depth of the worshipper’s Devotion to his gods which 

of this piety influences the amount of effort to which deities will 
grants potency to any theistic miracles he calls for. Whenever a theist 

move themselves in order to aid a loyal devotee. 
requests aid from a deity, the Magnitude and Intensity of the miracle 

Since the divine status of a worshipped entity is often based upon 
is equal to one tenth of his Devotion score. 

the worship it receives, deities are motivated to watch over their sup- 
Devotion is often utilised to measure the progression of a wor- 

plicants. This is done in a myriad of ways, from commanding its 
shipper within a cult, the upper echelons being restricted to those 

most devoted priests to establish cults or temples —which in turn pro- 
who demonstrate the proper dedication. This in turn can limit what 

vide materialistic support to its worshippers within a community — to 
miracles are available to a worshipper of particular cult rank; as 

clevating zealots as figureheads of high political or military status, by 
few religions are likely to grant their most potent powers to mere 

providing them with potent powers. 
initiates. 

Worship is the fundamental keystone of this divine (or perhaps 
Last but by no means least, in the right circumstances Devotion 

infernal) magical ecology. The more worship, or propitiation, a deity 
can potentially be used to resist various psychological attacks, tests of 

receives, the more magical might it garners; which in turn must be 
faith or contests of competing passions. 

given back or used to aid its supplicants or else risk losing their faith- 
ful attendance. 

Not every being who receives worship is necessarily a god per se. ExhHOoRrTt (IINNTT++CCHA)) 
One man’s deity may be another man’s demon. In fact nothing pre- Exhort is the skill used to coerce the gods to send a worshipper 

vents the creation of a theistic culture which venerates monstrous, the magical aid he requires. It can be portrayed in several ways, but 

alien beings from other dimensions. Providing these beings - no mat- combines a number of different aspects such as strength of passion, 

ter their origin — are fed, entertained or placated in the correct man- egocentric will, ritualistic knowledge and understanding of divine 

ner they will channel their power through those who please them. psychology, to put forth a request which the deity cannot ignore. 

178



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

Mechanistically the skill works as a simple base chance to suc- 
cessfully channel power from the god. A theist with Exhort (Lord AccCtTiInNgG LiIkke Your Gopd 
Dark Maggot) 70% has a 70% chance of performing the relevant In some settings, as hus Devotion increases, so does the propensity of 

miracle. the worshupper to act in the ways the focus of that veneration acts. This 

Exactly how a miracle manifests can vary dramatically according may not be due to any supernatural link, merely the pressures of cult mem- 

to the setting. A successful exhortation can impel the deity to either: bershap, voluntary geases or even social expectation. Whatever the source 
of the influence, a worshipper’s behaviour or judgment can begin to reflect 

& Channel his knowledge and power through the theist those of his god, potentially leading to gradual personality changes. 
& Cast the miracle on the theist’s behalf 1t 15 believed by many cults that their gods are more able, or at least 
& Manifest before the theist (and all observers) to perform the more willing, to aid those who espouse their divine patron’s virtues. Acting 

deed personally in a manner contrary lo a god’s desires can land that worshupper in deep 
trouble. Much depends on the nature of the bond between theust and deity; 

Taking the case of the Demon Lord Ningilin as an illustration, 
whether it can be an informal relationship, or if the strength of the tie 

a worshipper who successfully called upon him to destroy a group 
demands a worshipper behave precisely bike the god in order to maintain 

of sacrilegious enemies with his power of wormy transformation, 
the flow of magical power between them. 

might find that the god grants the worshipper the words of invo- 
cation and magical strength to cast the magic himself; or that the N ' 
miracle simply occurs without further effort on the worshipper’s 
part; or most worryingly of all, that Ningilin himself steps down STtaARrTtIinNgG THhEeIiSsTtSs 
from the sky, and personally transforms the interlopers with his own A character that begins the game as a theist must choose a single 
putrescent hands. cult to follow; either designed by the Games Master, agreed between 

the player and Games Master, or chosen from the examples given in 
the Cults and Brotherhoods chapter. Only one cult can be chosen 

Cuurlts aAnNDd MIiRrAaCcLlEeSs at this stage but others can potentially be joined during the course 
of play. 

A theist’s skills are indelibly linked to a specific religion, normally 
Theist characters start with knowing those miracles available to 

organised and known as a cult. Most cults are ancient faiths and 
someone of their cult rank, but not exceeding a number equal to 

usually accepted — or at least tolerated — by the local culture. Some 
one twentieth of their Devotion skill. Once the game begins they are 

are limited to a single city or tribe, whereas others can span nations. 
restricted in what additional powers they can learn, and when they 

Even the number of deities incorporated within a cult can vary, with 
can learn them. 

some cults tied to a single divine being, whereas others can consol- 
idate an entire pantheon. In fact a single deity could have a dozen 
different, independent cults devoted to various aspects of its celestial LeEaArRnNIinNgG MIiRrAaCcLlEeSs 
magnificence! The costs of learning new miracles are based upon an invest- 

It is a cult’s deities which provide the miracles available to dedi- ment of Experience Rolls as described in the Magic chapter on page 

cated worshippers. Correspondingly there are no preset restrictions 118. However, most priesthoods restrict the availability of certain 

to the number of miracles each cult has, nor even that they should miracles according to cult rank, ensuring that worshippers prove 

be balanced to one another. In general, the powers offered by the their devotion and loyalty before trusting them with such knowledge. 

cult reflect the nature of that deity or deities venerated. The only Even the achievement of promotion within the cult does not neces- 

thing which is fairly certain is that the cult’s own priesthood will limit sarily grant a character automatic access to any new powers. 

the availability of what miracles to which it has access, to those of Learning miracles may require the theist to prove himself wor- 

proven faith and trustworthiness. thy in a number of different ways, depending on the nature of the 

For example the Cult of Myceras, war god of Meeros, may grant access to cult. Some require the completion of a heroic quest to attest their 

the maracles Beast Form, Berserk, Clear Skies, Consecrate, Fortyfy, Sacred Band, faith or a pilgrimage to seek out a holy spot where their god myth- 

Shield and Sunspear. Whilst the Cult of the Seven Badoshi Devils might instead ically gained that particular power; whilst others might necessitate 

provide Bind Ghost, Chameleon, Consecrate, Earthquake, Madness, Perseverance the slaying of a worthy sacrifice, or a superior to demonstrate their 

and True Scimitar;, each of the seven demigods providing one of the miracles. right to this secret knowledge, or going into seclusion for many weeks 

Thus cults, like other magical organisations, are similar to Com- inhaling mind-expanding narcotics to seek oneness with their deity. 

bat Styles: diverse combinations of deities and miracles amalgam- Thus learning how to call upon new miracles is rarely just a pro- 

ated into a single faith. Since cults are often viewed as the patrons saic case of paying enough silver to convince the priesthood — as that 

of particular careers or irrevocably bound to specific philosophies, is how lay members engage the services of priests to cast miracles on 

it may be unusual for a worshipper to pay more than lip service to their behalf. To gain these potent powers for themselves, characters 

more than one faith. must undergo great challenges and moral dilemmas, binding them- 

Professional theists who serve the shrines and temples of a cult selves closer to the cult and the deities they revere. 

are often well regarded, if not feared, for their zealous beliefs; and 
take the trouble to dress, act and behave appropriately to properly 
revere their patron gods. 

179



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

KAaRrAa'’Ss SaAgGaA JoOIinNiInNgG MOoRrEe ThHAaNn ONnEe Curlt 
Kara begins the campaign by joining the priesthood of Myceras, specially If the campaign setting permits, nothing prevents membership 

selectedfrom the virginal dancing girls who entertain the god on holy days with of multiple cults, providing they are not the antithesis of each other. 
thewr passionate war dances. Whether her excluswe mnvitation was due to the Tor instance it may be reasonable for characters to be members of 
political machinations of her father to save her from the lechery of Xenos, or a state religion and a professional cult, and still worship a family 
whether the god himself expressed an interest due to her beauty and dedication, deity. In such cases a separate devotional pool must be maintained 
Kara does not know, for each individual cult. 

In exchangefor an oath of abstinence andf authful service, she us inducted However, there is a limit to how much magical energy can be 
into the Cult of Myceras as an initate. Much of her time 15 spent clearing up amassed. No matter how many cults they are members of, the com- 
the mess produced by the incessant sacrificial offerings requested by the city’s bined amount of Magic Points stored in the pools cannot exceed the 
warrwrs, yet during the evenings she us taught the ways of worshup. By the time POW of the character. Attempting to do so results in Magic Points 
the game starts she has a Devotion of 63 % and has learned allfour of those dissipating from the other pools until the stored total once again 
cult miracles which Myceras provides to Initiates (1 muraclefor each 20% or equals the theist’s POW. 
theregf of her skill). 

DOoNnAaTtIinNGg MAaGgIiCc POoIiNnTtSs 
Dedicating Magic Points to their devotional pool requires that 

UssIinNgG THhEeIisSmM the theist be present at a shrine, temple or holy place with con- 
nection to the cult’s god or pantheon. The ritual takes the form of 

A theist may call upon some of the most potent magical effects 
ceremony, meditation or prayer, and often incorporates some type 

available to mortal magicians. However, their exhortations require 
of offering above and beyond the pure Magic Points — perhaps an 

much preparation, primarily in the form of worshipping and making 
animal sacrifice, financial tribute to the priesthood or a gift pleasing 

dedications to the gods. These religious acts are normally restricted 
to the deity. 

to places deemed sacrosanct, so the reach of a cultis often limited to 
The actual source of the Magic Points can be somewhat abstract 

the locales close by shrines, temples or particular holy sites dedicated 
(see Where do Magic Points Come From? page 115). For example, if 

to the deity or deities in question. 
Magic Points come from sacrificial offerings, then the theist himself 
must orchestrate, or at least participate in, the offering. The import- 

DeevvoTtiioNnAaLl PooLls ant concept here is that a worshipper must be physically present at 
Ciult members who advance beyond the cult rank of Lay Member the donation, else the Magic Points generated do not transfer to his 

may begin to draw upon the gods by use of the Exhort skill. Every devotional pool. 
miracle they call for must be paid for in advance of the request, by It is recommended that the current number of Magic Points in 
sacrifice or donation of Magic Points into something called a devo- the pool cannot exceed the size of the most recent donation. Thus a 
tional pool. This pool represents the strength of the bond between theist with three Magic Points in his pool who sacrifices a white bull 
worshipper and god, and must be regularly topped up. (worth seven Magic Points) would raise his pool to seven points, not 

While Magic Points remain in the pool, the theist can use them ten. In this way a deity cannot be appeased with a series of petty 
to request miracles, but once the pool is expended no more requests offerings which slowly accumulate excessive devotional strength. 
may be made. The source of these points need not necessarily be the 
theist himself (see Donating Magic Points below) but the maximum 

SaAcCrRoOSsaAnNCcTt LoOCcAaTtIioONnSs 
size of the pool is limited by the theist’s cult rank. 

The concept of only being allowed to recharge their devotional 

& Lay Member — None pool at specific holy places may initially seem rather restrictive, but 

& Inidate — ¥4 of the Theist's POW this need not be an overly prohibitive aspect of theism. A worship- 

« Acolyte — /2 of the Theist’s POW per can call upon his god or gods for miracles at any time; they only 

& Priest — % of the Theist’s POW need to return to a temple to reaffirm the bond with the deity. 

« High Priest — All of the Theist’s POW This fundamental element of theism should instead been seen 
as an opportunity by Games Masters to provide challenges and plot 

The size of the devotional pool has no bearing on the theist’s hooks with which to entwine his characters, granting them reasons 
normal POW capacity for storing personal Magic Points. Assuming to return to the source of their power, search out lost places of divine 
the theist is donating Magic Points from his own POW, after the significance or build new temples to spread the worship of their cult. 
transference is made he can regenerate or recoup Magic Points as Whilst this works well in settings where cults are localised, it can 
normal. pose a problem in campaigns where the characters are expected to 

The implication of this method of paying for their miracles is travel extensively. Assuming the cult or gods are not omnipresent 
that a worshipper, with enough preparation time, can fully load 
up both his devotional pool, and his own personal Magic Points in 
advance of performing some quest. On the downside, refilling his 
devotional pool requires him not only to return to a place of cult 
significance, but also personally to donate or transfer the points from 
his own resources. 

180



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

KAaRrAa'’Ss SaAgGaA 
Kara, now an acolyte of Myceras, is sent to one of the outlying watch 

lowers which guard the city-state’sfertile valley territory, garrisoned by a unit 
of heavy Meerish infantyy. Although she left the city well prepared, several 
attacks by a strange creature have required Kara to cast many miracles, drain- 
ing her devotional pool to a single Magic Point. 

Fortunately her visit coincides with a cult holy day sacred to Myceras and 
the watch tower incorporates a sanctified shrine to the god. As the attending 
representative of the cull, Kara leads the soldiers in_formal worstap of their 
patron deity. The Games Master declares that the ceremony will generate a 
number of Magic Points, which Kara may tap in order to restore part of her 
devotional pool. 

Stnce the squad numbers less than 100 worshappers, the amounotf Magic 
Points she may harvest from the ceremony s equal to one quarter of Kara’s 
POWor 4 MPs. These she transfers into her devotwonal pool, replenishing it 
to 4 MP Thus is only half of her potential maximum, but even if she held a 
second ceremony on the next holy day she cannot increase the current number 
of pool Magic Points beyondf our; limited as she us by the size of her congre- 
gation. Kara will need to return to the main temple to gather a greater number 
of Magic Points, or use an alternative source of power. 

Thirdly, on the last turn of the exhortation the theist must pass 
an Exhort skill check. This reveals whether or not the worshipper 
has performed the ritual request in the correct manner. Failure to 
perform this correctly can result in the god turning a deaf ear to the 
supplicant, or worse still, punishing them in some manner. 

CossTt oOFf REeQqUuEeSsTtIinNgG aA MIiRrAaCcLlEe 
The cost of requesting a miracle depends on both its cult level 

and the success level of the Exhort skill roll: 

across the game world, Games Masters can aid theists on long or 
& Critical Success: the miracle occurs yet there is no Magic 

far-reaching quests in various ways. Some suggestions are: 
Point cost. 

& The deity presenting the theist with a holy relic which acts as & Success: the caster’s devotional pool loses the full Magic Point 

a portable shrine or temple cost, and the miracle occurs successtully. 

& The ability to build temporary shrines which work a single & Failure: the miracle does not occur, but no Magic Point is 

time if sanctified with a suitable offering taken from the devotional pool. 

& Allowing theists to worship at foreign temples which enshrine & Fumble: the miracle does not occur, and 1 Magic Point is 

a similar divine being as their own deity taken from the devotional pool. 

& Making certain natural locations by default, sacrosanct 
to their deity (all caves, mephitic hot springs or the sea for 

Initiate level miracles cost one Magic Point, Acolyte level mira- 
instance) 

cles cost two, and Priest level miracles cost three. 

EXxHhOoRrTtAaTtIioOnN TIimMEe 
REeQqUuEeSsTtIinNgG aA MIiRrAaCcLlEe Requesting a miracle takes an increasing amount of time 

Calling for a miracle is simply a matter of performing the correct depending on the cult level the miracle becomes available at: 
exhortation to convince the god to channel its power through or on 
behalf of its worshipper. Such a request depends on a number of & Initiate level miracles take 1 Turn 

prerequisites. & Acolyte level miracles take 2 Turns 

First the theist must have mastered understanding of miracle & Priest level miracles take 3 Turns 

being requested, as described earlier under Learning Miracles. 
If the theist wishes to cast multiple instances of the same miracle 

Without knowing the correct prayer or exhortation, the worshipper 
with a single exhortation roll, then each additional instance adds an 

cannot convince his deity to perform the miracle. 
extra turn to the time, and adds its full Magic Point requirement to 

Secondly the theist must have the requisite number of Magic 
the final cost. 

Points remaining in the devotional pool he maintains with that deity. 
The Exhort skill check is made on the final turn of the exhorta- 

If too few remain, or the pool has run dry, the god will no longer 
tion; the result of the skill check occurring immediately. 

listen to any requests made to it. Thus a worshipper should, when 
possible, take care to perform regular donations to their god. 

181



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

MAaGgNnIiTtUuDdEe AanNDd InNtTEeNnSsIitTyY RAaNnKk 
The potency of miracles is based upon the strength of the rela- The minimum cult rank the spell is available to. This is a guide- 

tionship between a theist and his god. The more devoted the wor- line only. Cults of gods which specialise or control a particular sphere 

shipper, the more power the deity can funnel through them. This of power may offer certain miracles to lower ranking cult members. 

not only increases the effect of the miracle, but also makes it more 
difficult for others to dispel. ReessiistT ((EEvVaAdDeE//EEnNdDuURrAaNnCcEe/ WWIilLlLpPoOwWEeRr)) 

Miracles have a default Magnitude and Intensity equal to one Offensive miracles do not necessarily take effect automatically. 

tenth of the worshipper’s Devotion skill value. Resisting targets may make an Opposed Evade, Endurance or Will- 

A theist need not apply the entirety of a miracle’s Intensity if power test (as specified) in order to avoid the effect of the miracle 

they wish to limit the effect of the god’s magic. entirely. Note that Resist (livade) spells require the target to have a 
Combat Action available in order to throw themselves clear. 

DIiSsPpEeLlLliInNgG Aa MIiRrAaCcLlEe 
Miracles may be dismissed by spells or spirits capable of negat- Note that some of the following spells can be extremely potent. 

ing magic. Due to the inherent strength of theist miracles, it usually This is deliberate, and Games Masters who fear abuse should limit 

requires a counterspell of great potency to affect them. the availability of these miracles to antagonistic cults, for which they 
are primarily designed. No specific guidance is provided for whether 

LIimMIitTaAtTiIoOnNSs tToO MIiRrAaCcLlEeSs certain miracles are restricted to the exhorting theist or can be cast 
There are no overt limitations to the concurrent number or on others; nor whether the recipient must be a member of that cult. 

potency of miracles a theist can maintain, since in effect their god Such things must be decided when the cult is designed. 
is doing all of the work for them. The only restrictions occur in the 
need to return to a cult sanctuary to recharge their devotional pool ABbSsOoRrPpTtIioOnN 
of Magic Points. Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate 

Some miracles may possess an extended duration which can last This miracle absorbs incoming magic aimed at the recipient 

hours, days or even months. In these cases the size of the theist’s or his equipment, converting its energy into Magic Points which 

devotional pool should be temporarily reduced by the number of then replenish his personal Magic Points attribute, assuming there 

Magic Points for each miracle which is still active. is space for the additional points. Excess Magic Points garnered 
through Absorption simply vanish. Absorption does not affect spells 
already in existence, prior to the miracle’s manifestation. The effects 
of Absorption depend on the relative Magnitude of both itself and 

MIiRrAaCcLlEe DEeSsCcRrIiPpTtIioOnNSs the incoming spell. Any spell absorbed by this miracle is cancelled, 
Every divine miracle is defined by a series of traits explaining and has no effect. 

how it is used in the game, followed by a description of the spell’s 
precise effects. In most cases the physical and temporal parameters ABbSsOoRrPpTtIioOnN REessUuLlTtSs 

of miracles can be hand waved unless the Games Master wishes to Incoming Spell’s Magnitude is. . . Effect 

keep detailed track during tactical situations. Equal to or weaker than Absorption’s The incoming spell is absorbed, and 

Theists need not call forth miracles at their maximum effects if Magnitude Absorption remains. 

they wish to be more selective. 1 or more points stronger than Absorption eliminated, and incoming 

Absorption’s Magnitude spell takes effect. 
ARrEeAa (X)) 

The miracle affects all targets within a specified radius, described AEeGgIiSs 
as Metres, Tens of Metres or Kilometres. The defined units are mul- Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate 
tiplied by the Intensity of the miracle to determine the actual radius. Creates or augments a shield which glows with the cult symbols 
If the miracle lacks the Ranged trait, the effect is centred upon the of the deity. The magical shield takes the attributes of a Hoplite 
casting theist or whatever he touches. shield, although its parrying Size depends on the Intensity of the 

miracle. Intensity 1-2 is a Small shield, 3-4 Medium, 5-6 Large, 7-8 
DuurraaTtIioOnN (X) 

Huge, 9-10 Enormous and 11+ Colossal. 
The miracle’s effects stay in place for an amount of time defined 

The Aegis is immune to all damage. If cast upon an existent 
as either Instant, Minutes, Hours, Days or Months. The defined 

shield, it is protected until the miracle ends. 
period is multiplied by the Intensity of the miracle to calculate the 
actual duration, except of course if the miracle is instantaneous. At AWwAaKkEeNn 
the end of this period the miracle vanishes. Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Priest 

Awaken brings part of the god’s awareness into its consecrated 
RAaNnGgEeDd (XX ) 

shrine or temple, enabling the deity to animate its sanctified idol or 
Ranged miracles may be cast upon targets within a range defined 

take control of its sacred animal(s), depending on the nature of the 
as either Metres or Tens of Metres. The defined units are multiplied 

cult. It is normally reserved for cult holy days, except in times of 
by the Intensity of the miracle to determine the actual distance. Mir- 

emergency. The embodied god cannot leave the consecrated area, 
acles which lack the Ranged trait may only be cast on others if they 

but during that time it can awe its worshippers, express its displea- 
can be touched for the entirety of the exhortation. 

sure or defend its own shrine. 

182



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

The limits of the miracle depend on what is used for the embod- in which case the medium through which the information is trans- 
iment. An awakened statue or cult idol can have a combined STR +- mitted is different. 
SIZ of up to ten times the Intensity. This value is used to calculate If the target is either magically protected against scrying by a 
both the idol’s Damage Modifier and its Hit Points per location. spell of greater Magnitude, held (or hiding) within the consecrated 
Its Armour Points depend upon the material it is constructed from, ground of a different cult, or dead, then the miracle fails. The target 
usually 6 for wooden idols, 8 for hollow metal and 10 for stone. The of Behold may attempt to resist the miracle if desired. 
idol performs all actions at the same value as the caster’s Devotion 
skill, has a Initiative Bonus equal to the Intensity, and one Action BEeRrSseErRkK 
Point per four levels of Intensity (or fraction thereof). Other physical Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate, Resist (Waillpower) 

attributes should be created based upon the shape and size of the The recipient of Berserk is overcome with bloodlust, causing him 

idol (see Default Natural Weapons for Unusually Sized Creatures to disregard his own safety in exchange for being imbued with tre- 

page 222). mendous stamina and toughness. For the duration of the miracle the 

Awakened creatures are handled slightly differently. Like idols Damage Modifier of the recipient is increased by two steps, the Size 

the deity may awaken a creature of up to a maximum STR+SIZ of his weapon counts as one step larger for the purpose of penetrat- 

of ten times the Intensity of the miracle. However, if the shrine or ing parries, and he is immune to all the detrimental effects of Seri- 

temple lacks a giant example of the sacred animal, the deity can ous Wounds and Fatigue. A Major wound will still incapacitate him. 

instead awaken multiple beasts provided their combined total does In return the subject may not Parry, Evade or cast any magic 

not exceed the limit set by the Intensity. Other than that the creature while under the influence of Berserk. However the berserker auto- 

or creatures possess their normal Action Points, Damage Modifier, matically succeeds in resisting any Special Effect used against him. 

Hit Points, Initiative Bonus and Armour Points. They perform skills Unwilling recipients receive a chance to resist. Normally, the 

at either their base (or trained) value or at the value of the caster’s recipient remains in the Berserk state for the entire duration of the 

Devotion skill, whichever is higher. spell, but Games Masters may allow a Berserk character to shake 
off the effects with an unopposed Willpower test. At the end of the 

BAaCcKkLlAaSshH spell, the recipient immediately suffers twice the deferred Fatigue 
Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Metres), Rank Initiate levels they would have lost during the entire combat. 
Backlash makes physical assault upon the recipient extremely 

dangerous, redirecting an inflicted injury back upon the attacker. BIinNdD GHhOoSsTt 
The magic only affects wounds that inflict equal or less Hit Points Duration (Days), Rank Acolyte, Resust (Willpower) 

than the Intensity of the miracle — translocating the damage so that Bind Ghost takes the soul of a creature or person just slain, and 

it affects the attacker in precisely the same location they struck, temporarily turns it into a Haunt (see page 150) bound to the place 

ignoring any armour. of its death. The miracle is usually performed on animal sacrifices or 

This miracle affects both hand to hand and ranged attacks, pro- willing volunteers, but in cases where the victim does not wish to be 

viding the assailant is within range. Even though the recipient may so bound they are permitted the opportunity to resist. 

be near immune to injury, it does not provide immunity to any Spe- Tor the duration of the miracle the ghost must obey commands 

cial Effect they may have suffered as part of the attack. given to it by the theist. However, the way it performs its duties is 
guided by the nature or personality of the victim. Once the miracle 

BEeAaSsTt FoOrRmM ends, the soul is freed from all obligations, and permitted to depart 
Duration (Hours), Ranged (Metres), Rank Acolyte, Resist (Endurance) to its intended afterlife. The theist is limited to binding souls whose 
This miracle transforms the target and all his personal belong- POW is no more than twice the Intensity of the miracle. 

ings into an animal that is sacred to the cult. The target retains his 
INT, CHA and POW scores, but exchanges his STR, DEX, CON BLless CrrooOPps 
and SIZ scores for average values for that of the animal type, and Area (Tens of Metres), Duration (Months), Rank Acolyte 

gains a bonus to each physical Characteristic of +1 per point of When cast on cultivated farmland this miracle protects the crops 

Intensity. He also gains the natural abilities of the creature. The within its area against naturally occurring bad weather, blight, and 

animal cannot be mystical or magical in any way, and the Games insect infestation, guaranteeing a nominal harvest if the magic is 

Master should have final say as to what manner of creature would maintained from sowing to harvest. Bless Crops can also provide 

fit a specific cult if it is not obvious. protection against magical disasters, provided the Magnitude of the 
adverse magic does not exceed that of the blessing. 

BehHoLldD 
Area (Metres), Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate, Resust (Willpower) BRrEeAatThHEe WAaTtEeRr 
Behold summons a vision of what a fellow cult member of lesser Duration (Hours), Rank Initiate 

rank is currently experiencing. The image requires some sort of cult Breath Water permits the recipient to breathe water (the subject 

related paraphernalia in which to manifest, such as a sacred mirror, will still be able to breathe air as well) for the duration of the miracle. 

pool of pure water or even narcotic smoke rising from a brazier. It also protects against pressure if diving deep below the surface of a 

The view provided is limited to the defined area, centred upon lake or the sea. Under the influence of this miracle the recipient can 

the target of the miracle, which may permit identification of their speak and cast magic as normal. 

location if enough clues are visible. Behold conveys only a single 
primary sense, which for most cults is a visual image. Some however, 
depending on the deity in question, use sound or even scent instead; 

183



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

CAaLlLl WIiNnDdss The minimum labour required to create a temporary sanctuary 

Area (Kilometres), Duration (Hours), Rank Acolyte depends on the setting, but it should be significant enough to be 

This miracle permits the theist to bend the winds to his will. The considered a major effort; for example an entire day of collecting 

maximum strength of winds they can unleash depends on their cult stones and rocks to form a crude altar. In exceptional circumstances 

rank. Acolytes can control or summon up to Strong Breezes, Priests it can be cast on cult artefacts. 

up to Moderate Gales, and High Priests up to Storms (see Weather The effects of the miracle are many fold. Not only does the con- 

page 84). If the caster can control the wind he may reduce it to a secrated area permit cult worshippers to recharge their Devotional 

complete Calm or change its direction if desired. If two or more Pool (see page 180), but it also allows for a number of additional 

weather magics are in contest over control of the winds, the spell or cult miracles (up to the consecration’s Intensity) to be embedded or 

miracle with the greatest Magnitude takes precedence. bound to the area, extending their duration (or held readiness) to 
that of the Consecrate. 

CHhAaMmEeLlEeoONn These extra miracles need not come from whoever performs the 

Duration (Minutes), Rank Acolyte consecration, but the cult rank of the magic cannot exceed that of 

This miracle permits the recipient to fade into the background, the consecrating acolyte or priest. Furthermore, each embedded 

becoming near invisible to normal observation. However Chame- miracle counts against the devotional pool of whichever theist cast 

leon is only effective when present in an environment specific to it, until the Consecrate itself expires or, if of Instant duration, the 

the nature of the cult. The Chameleon miracle provided by a syl- miracle is triggered. 

van cult, for example, would only be effective in woods and forests; Such is the strength of the divine presence within the sanctified 
whereas a thief cult might instead provide Chameleon which works area, that requesting miracles from unaligned gods whilst inside the 
in darkness and shadow. perimeter of the consecration becomes more difficult. Exhorting the 

Whilst the recipient remains motionless, crouched or flattened deities of neutral cults suffer one grade of difficulty, whereas those 
against the terrain, they cannot be spotted by normal Perception of hostile cults are two grades harder. 
rolls relying on vision. If they move however, the constantly shifting 
patterns across their body will reveal them to sharp sighted individu- 
als. In these circumstances any attempt to interact with the recipient 

KAaRrAa'’Ss SaAgGaA 
—whether observing where they go, attacking, parrying, and so on — Afier years off aithful service Kara is promoted to the rank of priest, and 
inflicts a penalty against the observer of one difficulty grade per four granted the opportunity to found a new shrine to Myceras in the newly annexed 
points of Intensity. Creatures with other primary senses or observers city of Kopash, a known den of thieves and iniquity. Kara finds a suitable 
with magical perceptions are immune to this miracle. plot of ground in the Mercenaries® Quarter, and has constructed a modest 

roofed portico, within the walls of which is the cult sanctuary where Myceras’s 
CLlEeaArR SKkIiEeSs 

bejewelled golden statue stands, beneath the open sky. 
Area (Kilometres), Duration (Hours), Rank Acolyte 

When it is_finished Kara holds a dedication ceremony, wnviting the wor- 
This miracle grants a reprieve from cloudy or overcast weather. 

shuppers of Myceras to attend. During these rituals she casts Consecrate to 
Rain dwindles, sweltering humidity is reduced, and dark clouds sep- 

sanclify the area. At the same time she decides to bind several other maracles 
arate to reveal the sky. The scale of the effect depends on the cult 

inlo the consecration in order to protect the shrine. She has the choice of only 
rank of the theist. Acolytes can disperse up to Heavy Cloud cover 

two spells suitablefor the task, Beast Form or Sunspear. 
and Moderate rains, Priests up to Moderately Overcast cloud cover 

Not wishing to bind up too much of her devotional pool in maintaining 
and Very Heavy rains, and High Priests up to Storm Clouds and 

the shrine defences, she settles on placing a primed Beast Form (Bull) on 
Deluges (see Weather page 84). Clear Skies cannot alter magical- 

the statue, and a Sunspear on the altar; requesting that Myceras cast these 
ly-created weather effects of a greater Magnitude. 

maracles if anyone atlempts to desecrate the cult objects. This reduces the size 

Crloudp CaLlLl of her pool by four points, but Kara predicts the investment will be necessary. 
Sure enough, the following morning Kara discovers a rather distressed thief 

Area (Kilometres), Duration (Hours), Rank Acolyte 
transformed into a bull and caught within the shrine precinct; sacrificing this 

This miracle gathers together shreds and wisps of cloud, weaving 
bull to the god sends word that this particular shrine @s off hmats... 

them together to bring rain, block out the sun or even form con- 
cealing fogs. Like Clear Skies the extent of the effect depends on 
cult rank. Acolytes can create Heavy Cloud cover, Moderate rains 
or mist, Priests can gather up to Moderately Overcast cloud cover, 

COoRrRrUuPpTtIioOnN 
Very Heavy rains or thick fog, and High Priests up to Storm Clouds, 

Duration (Hours), Ranged, Rank Acolyte, Resist (Endurance) 
Deluges and Pea-soup fogs (see Weather page 84). Cloud Call can- 

This dire miracle is used as a curse against enemies or those that 
not alter magically-created weather effects of a greater Magnitude. 

transgress cult tenets. If the target of the spell fails to resist, they 

COoNnSsEeCcRrAaTtEe begin to deteriorate physically in a manner suitable to the god. This 
could be anything from pestilent boils, vegetative outgrowths or even 

Area (‘Iens of Metres), Duration (Months), Rank Acolyte 
a slow transformation of flesh to sand. 

Consecrate is vital to the creation of sanctified ground, upon 
which theists may communicate with their gods. It is usually as fun- 
damental a part of a shrine or temple foundation as its cornerstone, 
but may actually be cast almost anywhere providing some form of 
temporary altar or image of the deity is erected prior to the casting. 

184



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

At the end of each hour, the victim must make an unopposed EaArRtThHqQUuAaKkEe 
Endurance roll and depending on the success level, suffer the Area (Tens of Metres), Duration (Instant), Rank Priest, Resist (Evade) 
following: Earthquake causes a ground tremor capable of knocking people 

from their feet and collapsing rigid buildings. At the very minimum, 
& 1If the roll is a critical success, the victim takes no damage 

failing to resist the miracle causes the victim to fall prone. If located 
& 1If the roll is successful, the victim sustains 1d3 points of dam- 

within a building, built up area or some vulnerable location (such 
age to every location 

as a forest or beneath a cliff), failing to evade also indicates that the 
& 1If the roll fails, the victim sustains 1d6 points of damage to 

person is struck, and trapped by falling debris. For secondary effects, 
every location 

consult the following table. Use the size of the damage dice in a 
& If the roll is fumbled, the victim dies in a horrific transforma- 

Contest of Strength (see Brawn) to determine the difficulty of being 
tion of their body 

extracted from the wreckage. 
Those who realise what they have contracted either seek out 

EaArRtThHqQUuAaKkEe TAaBbLlEe 
someone capable of dispelling the curse, or return to the cult temple, 
begging for forgiveness and premature cessation of the punishment. Intensity Secondary Effects Potential 

Damage 

CUurrREe MAaLlAaDdYy 1 Suspended objects swing. None 

Duration (Instant), Rank Initiate 2 Delicately balanced objects topple. None 

This miracle cures the effects of any mundane disease or poison 3 Walls and buildings creak. None 

afflicting the target; or magical ones whose potency is less than the Plaster and glass windows crack, trees and other 
4 . . . None 

value of the Devotion skill of the caster. If the recipient is suffering tall objects quiver dramatically. 

from the possession of a Disease Spirit, the spell exorcises the hostile Heavy furniture moved, wall mounted objects 
None 

spirit provided its Intensity does not exceed half the Intensity of the fall, cracks open in walls. 

miracle (rounded up). For example, an Intensity 5 Cure Malady can Modest buildings of earth, wattle and daub or 

exorcise any Disease Spirit of Intensity 3 or less. . ; . 1d2 damage to a 
6 mud brick partially collapse. Minor branches 

single location 
fall. 

CUuRrEe SEenNSsEe 
Heavy furniture overturned. Buildings of 

Duration (Instant), Rank Acolyte 
carth, wattle and daub or mud brick destroyed. 

Clure Sense enables the theist to cure a specific type of sensory o Lo i 1d4 damage to a 
7 Buildings of solid timber or masonry partially . . 

injury such as deafness, blindness, and so on. The effects of the mir- single location 
collapse. Fall of columns, statuary and 

acle are permanent. boundary walls. Major tree limbs fall. 

Modest buildings collapse. Ground cracks 
Diismiisss ELleEmMEeNnTtAaLl 

conspicuously, rockfalls from steep slopes. 1d6 damage to a 
Duration (Instant), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Initiate, Resist 8 

Underground pipes and sewers broken. single location 
(Wallpower) 

Wooden bridges collapse. Small trees topple. 
Dismiss Elemental may be cast against Gnomes, Salamanders, 

Well constructed buildings collapse. Large 
Shades, Sylphs or Undines. The spell affects an elemental of up to 

9 scale fortifications, city walls and stone bridges 1d8 damage to 
1 cubic metre in size per point of Intensity. Failure to resist the spell 

damaged. Ground badly cracked. Landslides two locations 
causes the elemental to be dismissed, leaving the material substance 

and avalanches considerable. Big trees topple. 
of its body in place. 

Few, if any, structures remain standing. Tunnels 
] 1d10 damage to 

Diismiisss MAacgiic 10 and caves collapse. Broad fissures in ground. . 
three locations 

Huge trees topple. 
Duration (Instant), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Initiate 

Total destruction, even colossal stone 
Dismiss Magic may be cast against either a general target, or a . i 1d12 damage to 

11+ monuments suffer partial collapse. Cliffs and 
specific miracle or spell. Dismiss Magic will eliminate a combined ; four locations 

mountain flanks shatter. 
Magnitude of spells equal to its own Magnitude. A spell cannot be 
partially eliminated. When used against a spell of equal or lower 
Magnitude which normally counters magic (such as Absorption, 

ELleEmMEeNnTtAaLl SuUmMMmOoNnIiNnGg 
Spell Resistance or Reflection) then Dismiss Magic takes precedence. 

Duration (Hours), Ranged (Metres), Rank Initiate 
If not aimed at a specific spell, Dismiss Magic starts with the 

This miracle calls up an elemental associated with the cult to 
most powerful magic affecting the target. If it fails to eliminate any 

assist as a personal guard or servant. For example cults associated 
spell (because the spell’s Magnitude is too high), then the miracle 

with the God of Storms would summon sylphs. The miracle sum- 
ends, and no more spells will be eliminated. 

mons an elemental of one cubic metre per point of Intensity in 1d3 
Dismiss Magic may be fired defensively to neutralise incoming 

offensive spells, by using the Counter Spell reactive action. Combat Rounds, which remains under the command of the theist 
for the entire duration but cannot stray further than the range. For 
obvious reasons, the caster must have access to the same volume of 
the elemental’s material to cast this spell successtully. If less mate- 
rial is available, then the caster can summon a smaller elemental if 
desired. 

185

(] 



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

ENnTtaANnGgLlEe FeEcCuUNnDdIiTtYy 
Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Acolyte, Resust (Evade) Duration (Months), Rank Acolyte 
Entangle animates natural vegetation so that it lashes about, When cast on a person or creature, Fecundity will — depending 

snagging and gripping the target. The victim must resist the miracle on its sex - ensure it will bear or sire offspring the next time it per- 
or be held immobile for its entire duration. forms a reproductive act. Provided the miracle is maintained for the 

full term of gestation or pregnancy, the progeny will be born healthy. 
ENnTtHhRrAaLlLl Tecundity also provides the antenatal young protection against mag- 

Duration (Hours), Rank Initiate ical curses, provided the Magnitude of the adverse magic does not 
Enthrall increases the recipient’s sexual attraction, making exceed that of the miracle. 

all those naturally interested in the recipient friendlier and more 
focussed upon them — which could be a very good or very bad thing FoORrTtIiFfyY 
depending on the circumstances. Members of the opposite sex (or Area (Tens of Metres), Duration (Instant), Rank Initiate, Resist (Evade) 
those of the same sex that would find the target sexually attractive) Tortify strengthens large scale constructions, making them more 
who attempt to resist any Influence or Streetwise rolls from the resilient to damage from natural disasters, siege weapons, and mag- 
recipient suffer one grade of difficulty. Resisting Seduction attempts ical attack. The miracle adds its Intensity to the natural Armour 
are treated as two grades harder. Points of all buildings and walls within its area of effect. Offensive 

magic which seeks to damage or modify a construction under the 
ExXcCoOMmMmUuNnICicAaTtEe protection of Fortify has its Intensity reduced by that of the Fortify 

Duration (Instant), Ranged (Metres), Rank Priest, Resist (Wallpower) miracle. 
Excommunicate can only be called down upon a worshipper of 

the caster’s cult. It severs the mystical link the worshipper shares GRrOoWwTtHh 
with his god, causing the target’s devotional pool to be drained of Area (Tens of Metres), Duration (Hours), Rank Preest 
all Magic Points, and permanently removing access to miracles from Growth accelerates the growing speed of vegetation, ageing it 
that cult. Unless the target can make amends for whatever transgres- by one year for each hour until the miracle concludes. Under its 
sion caused the excommunication to be cast in the first place, their effects, trees and bushes can increase in size and verdure dramati- 
cult specific skills of Devotion and Exhort become mere academic cally, although at the cost of wildly sprawling, tangled proliferation 
knowledge with no power. of every plant within the area of effect. Repeated use of this miracle 

can potentially grow a thick forest over what had been open fields a 
ExOoRrccCiIssmM few days previously. 

Duration (Instant), Rank Acolyte, Resist (Waillpower) 
By means of this miracle, the theist calls upon their god to drive HAaRrMmOoNnISisEe 

out a spirit currently possessing a corporeal being. Whether the pos- Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Initiate, Resist 
session is dominant or covert is immaterial. The magic exorcises (Wallpower) 
spirits with an Intensity of up to half the Intensity of the miracle. Harmonise causes the target to do exactly what the theist does. 
What occurs next depends on the attitude and type of spirit, but If not resisted the victim must mimic every physical move, albeit 
belligerent ones with the power to discorporate may be tempted to in a jerky, almost puppet-like manner. It only works on beings with 
engage other nearby targets in Spirit Combat. Thus this spell can be roughly the same physiology as the caster; with limbs or locations 
potentially dangerous for the caster or his fellows. not shared by both participants remaining unaffected by the magic. 

The miracle only controls gross motor skills, and does not permit 
EXxTtEenNSsIioOnN control of the victim’s speech. Use of this magic can humiliate 

Duration (Special), Rank Priest someone from afar, or perhaps even force them into performing a 
Extension lengthens the duration of any miracle with a non-in- murderous or suicidal act. 

stantaneous duration, for as long as the caster wishes to maintain If Harmonise is used to force the subject to attack or defend, the 
it. Extension can be cast any time, provided the miracle being combat style rolls are automatically one grade harder to accomplish 
extended is still functioning. Other than reducing the theist’s devo- owing to the jerky movement of the victim. 
tional pool by several Magic Points (three for Extension, and one 
or more for the extended miracle) the miracle has no other mainte- HEeaALl Bopdy 
nance requirements; unless the Games Master wishes to add any to Duration (Instant), Rank Acolyte 
match his setting. This powerful miracle instantly heals all Minor and Serious 

Wounds suffered by the target. Like Heal Wound, this miracle has 
FeEaArR no effect on Major Wounds save to stabilise the injury, preventing 

Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Metres), Rank Initiate, Resist (Wallpower) death. To repair maimed or dismembered body locations requires 
This miracle causes the target to be gripped with overwhelming the Rejuvenate miracle. 

fear. Targets which fail to resist will flee in terror away from the 
theist, and avoid engaging in combat unless brought to bay. It has no HEeaALl MIiNnDd 
effect on unconscious targets, targets without an IN'T or INS Char- Duration (Instant), Rank Acolyte 
acteristic, or targets that are currently under the effect of another This miracle removes all madness and mental derangements 
emotion-controlling spell of higher Intensity. from a single target. In the case of magically-induced madness, the 

186



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

spell works if its Magnitude is equal to or greater than that of the LiIgGhHtTnNIinNgG 
magical disorder. Duration (Instant), Ranged (Tens of Melres), Rank Initiate, Resist (Evade) 

This miracle causes a sizzling bolt of lightning to either streak 
HeeAaLl WoouunDd 

down from the sky, or be projected from the hand or weapon of the 
Duration (Instant), Rank Initiate 

theist, towards the target. If the bolt is not evaded, it will inflict 1d6 
Heals a single body location back to its full Hit Points, provided 

damage per two points of Intensity to a random hit location. Nat- 
the injury is no more severe than a Serious Wound. It has no effect 

ural and worn armour offers no protection against this damage, but 
on Major Wounds save for stabilising the injury, preventing death. 

magical protection does. 

HEeAaRrTt SEeIizZuUrREe 
Duration (Instant), Ranged (Metres), Rank Priest, Resist (Endurance) 
Another dreadful miracle known to the darkest gods, whoever 

suffers this dire magic feels the veritable hand of the deity reach 
within his chest, squeezing his heart or perhaps tearing it out com- 
pletely. Those that fail to resist the miracle suffer a fatal heart attack 
and die instantly. If the resistance roll succeeds, the target still suf- 
fers a number of Hit Points damage equal to Intensity of the spell, 
directly to the location where their heart is contained, normally the 
chest for humanoids. Creatures without hearts are immune to this 
miracle. 

Different forms of this miracle exist, affecting different organs 
according to the nature of the deity offering it (Brain Seizure, for 
example). 

IlLlLuUsSiIoOnN 
Area (Metres), Duration (Hours), Rank Imitiate, Resist (Special) 
Tllusion is used to change the sensory projections of an area or 

single target, making it seem to be something completely different. 
Tor example a tiger can be made to look like a harmless cat, sound 
like it meows when it roars, and feel silky soft instead of coarse wiry 
fur. The theist can adjust one sensory projection per two points of 
Intensity. Once set, the illusion can no longer be modified. 

The largest target which can be affected must be able to fit within 
the perimeter of the miracle. Unwilling living targets may resist with 
Endurance. Observers who interact with the illusion are permitted 
an opposed Willpower roll against the miracle, in order to resist 
any debilitating psychosomatic effects it creates, e.g. deafness, pain, 
nausea. Whilst the illusion itself is incapable of causing harm, the 
underlying target or area remains as dangerous as it was before the 
miracle. 

LAaYy TtoO REeSsTt 
Duration (Instant), Rank Initiate 

MAaDdNnEeSsSs 
This miracle is used to ensure that the soul of a recently killed 

Duration (Days), Ranged (Metres), Rank Imitiate, Resist (Waillpower) 
person or creature reaches a deserving afterlife. Its primary purpose 

This miracle infuses the target with gibbering madness. Targets 
is to prevent angry, possibly coerced victims returning from death 

which fail to resist will rant and rave uncontrollably, performing acts 
as vengeful spirits or reinhabiting their bodies as corporal undead. 

of utter insanity in a manner fitting to their personality, plot line 

LeEeEcChHIinNgG and dramatic circumstances. In general, mad characters should be 

Area (Iens of Metres), Duration (Minutes), Rank Acolyte more harmless distractions than ticking time bombs. In the case of 

Using the blood of sacrifices scattered over an area, this mir- player characters, until the Madness subsides or is somehow cured, 

acle disrupts the flow of magic which enters the zone, dissipating the insane victim should be placed under control of the Games Mas- 

its power. Within the area all magic, even that of the caster, is sup- ter unless he deems the player is capable of acting out the insanity. 

pressed by the Magnitude of the miracle. Any encroaching spell 
whose Magnitude is reduced to zero is rendered inactive until the 
target of its effect leaves the area. Spells cast within the region with 
equal or less Magnitude automatically fail. 

187



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

MIiNnDdBbLlAaSsTt PAaccIiFfyY 
Duration (Days), Ranged (Metres), Rank Initiate, Resist (Willpower) Area (Tens of Melers), Duration (Minutes), Rank Acolyte, Resist 

This spell blasts the intellect of the victim, obliterating their sapi- (Wallpower) 
ence. If not resisted, the victim’s IN'T is temporarily converted to Pacify suppresses aggressive and violent behaviour within its 
animalistic INS, removing from them the power of speech, writing area of effect. Those that fail to resist the miracle are unable to 
or any other form of communication. It also prevents them from cause harm to another, although they may defend themselves using 
utilising equipment and devices. If forced to fight in this condition, non-harmful techniques. If unthreatened, those subject to the magic 
the victim will by default use their Unarmed skill. Although pre- will sheathe or drop weapons, stop belligerent demonstration and 
vented from utilising complex thought, it does not limit instinct and cease all arguments. The miracle does not change personal opinion, 
base cunning. merely makes it difficult to act in a hostile manner. 

MIiNnDdLlIinNkK PEeRrSseEvVeErRaAnNCcEe 
Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Initiate Duration (Hours), Rank Initiate 
This miracle allows mind-to-mind communication, theistic Through this miracle the recipient can channel the strength 

knowledge and devotional pool Magic Points to be shared between of his god, becoming inured to the effects of hard labour. Whilst 
participants. Its use is normally restricted to those of the same or the miracle remains active, the target of this spell will not receive 
closely allied cults, since once the magical link is established; there another level of Fatigue, no matter the hardship faced. Perseverance 
are no safeguards as to what can be tapped from the participants — does not grant any additional capability to lift, march or work; it just 
all of whom must join the Mindlink willingly. ensures the recipient will keep on going. This miracle has no effect 

Mindlink has two main purposes. Either it allows an entire cult upon Fatigue lost from asphyxiation or blood loss. 
hierarchy to support a handful of its priests so that they may cast 
many miracles, powered by the devotional pools of associates and PRrOoPpIiTtIiaATtEe 
underlings; or it grants lesser ranked cult members the ability (albeit Area (Kilometres), Duration (Weeks), Rank Acolyte 

temporarily) to call forth miracles normally beyond their capability. Used by cults who try to appease darker, more hostile deities, 

Each instance of Mindlink connects a pair of individuals in a two Propitiate exchanges regular worship for the agreement to leave a 

way link. Several castings using the same individual but with differ- region alone. The precise effect depends on the god being propiti- 

ent partners will make them the hub of a Mindlink network, able to ated, but the area affected is centred upon the shrine or temple of 

draw on the resources of each of the partners. that cult. Propitiating a lightning deity for example would not nec- 

If a mental or emotion-affecting spell is cast at someone partici- essarily prevent storms happening within the radius of the miracle, 

pating in a Mindlink, then everyone else directly linked to them must but no serious fires or injuries would occur from lightning strikes. 

also resist the spell or suffer its consequences. Although participants Similarly the tremors of an earthquake god would still be felt in a 

in a Mindlink share deliberately transmitted thoughts, they remain city, but no buildings would collapse — assuming the propitiations 

their own entity, and may sever their connection to the Mindlink by were maintained of course. 

willing it so on their turn, or by leaving the spell’s range. 
RAaIinN oOFf (SSuUBbSstTaANnCcEe)) 

MIiRrAaGgEe Area (Rilometres), Duration (Minutes), Rank Priest 

Area (Metres), Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate This miracle summons dark brooding clouds which then begin 

Mirage obscures a region, covering it with strange optical illu- to rain a particular, and most likely horrible substance with specific 

sions, usually via the cult associations of the deity. An earth god relevance to the cult deity, anything from blood to frogs. The miracle 

might cause clouds of swirling sand which form unsettling faces; is intended to inspire awe or terror rather than inflict direct harm, so 

whereas a sun deity might infuse the area with blinding, shimmer- the actual things raining down are relatively harmless. A rain of spi- 

ing curtain of light. The effect of this disconcerting obscurement is ders for instance would only produce non-venomous types; a rain of 

to conceal precisely what stands within the area, and make ranged fire would look scary, but as each glowing ember reached the ground 

attacks extremely difficult. Firing at anyone within the Mirage suf- it would extinguish. During the event, members of the cult should 

fers one difficulty grade per four points of Intensity. be treated as having the Intimidate ability (see page 216). 

OBbLlIiTtEerRAaTtEe RAaIiSsEe UNnDdEeAaDd 
Area (Kilometres), Duration (Instant), Rank Priest, Resist (Willpower) Duration (Hours), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Acolyte 

A dire spell to those who seck fame or remembrance after death, Raise Undead uses the physical remains of a corpse to create 

Obliterate removes every record of their existence — scouring it from either a skeleton or zombie. The miracle infuses the corpse with part 

scrolls, clay tablets, carved hieroglyphs, and every other method of of the deity’s own consciousness, so that it can obey commands, and 

inscribing knowledge. In addition the name of that person is wiped act with a degree of independent intelligence. However, the skill 

from the mind of everyone within range, save for the casting priest, capabilities of the undead automaton are limited to those of the 

unless they resist the miracle. Although this miracle is normally used theist who creates them. 

to expunge the glory of those whose crimes are so unforgivable that The number of corpses which can be raised is equal to the Inten- 

they must be forgotten for all time, some darker gods offer this as a sity of the miracle. Each skeleton or zombie also gains a bonus to its 

means for their worshippers to maintain secretive anonymity. STR and CON characteristics, again equal to the Intensity. Thus a 
theist who exhorted his god to grant him an Intensity 9 Raise Dead, 

188



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

could animate 9 skeletons each with +9 to STR and CON. Only RIipPeEnN 
creatures of a SIZ equal or less than the caster’s POW can be raised. Area (Metres), Duration (Instant), Rank Initiate 

For further details on skeletons and zombies, refer to the Crea- Ripen brings forth a single crop of fruits, tubers, roots, nuts, or 
ture Chapter. seeds from the vegetation within the area of effect. The miracle does 

not guarantee they are edible since that depends on the plants, but 
REeFfLlEecCTtIioOnN 

does ensure the crop is at the peak of its ripeness, no matter when 
Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate 

during the year the miracle is cast. Ripen cannot cause a plant or tree 
This miracle reflects incoming magic aimed at the target or his 

to give forth more than a single crop annually, so if it is used early 
equipment, redirecting it back at the original caster, depending on 

during the growing season, the vegetation will spend the remainder 
their relative Magnitudes. It does not have any effect on spells that 

of the year recovering. 
are already affecting the target, or spells the theist casts upon himself. 

SaAcCrReEdD BAanNDd 
 REeFfLleEcCTtiIoOnN REeSsUuLlTtSs 

Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Initiate 
Incoming Spell’s Magnitude is. . . Effect When cast upon a group of worshippers the miracle binds the 
Equal to or weaker than Reflection’s Incoming spell reflected, and Reflection recipients together as a sacred brotherhood, sharing their life force 
Magnitude. remains. between them. This has little effect until one of their number is 
1 or more points stronger than Reflection eliminated, and incoming spell wounded, whereupon the surviving brothers spread the effects of 
Reflection’s Magnitude. takes effect. the injury between them. 

Damage is divided evenly amongst remaining recipients, applied 
to the same location which was injured. Any Special Effects which 

REeJjuUVvEenNAaTtEe occur remain only with the originally wounded band member. Thus 
Duration (Special), Rank Priest 

in a band of six temple guardians linked by this miracle, if one is 
This miracle heals a single body location suffering from a Major 

wounded in the arm for 8 points of damage — normally a Serious 
Wound, no matter whether it has been crushed, mutilated or dis- 

Wound — the damage is instead split so that the original target and 
membered. The freshness of the injury affects the time taken for the 

one other suffers 2 points in that arm, whilst everyone else in the 
miracle to complete. Provided the recipient is still alive, and the loca- 

band suffers 1 point. 
tion was wounded within a number of hours equal to the Intensity 

The maximum number of brothers who can be bound together 
of the miracle, then Rejuvenate will heal all the damage instantly. 

in the band cannot exceed the Intensity of the miracle. They must 
Beyond this threshold the body part must undergo a more trau- 

also share the same basic physiology, or the miracle will fail. 
matic repair, which takes a number of days equal to the Hit Points 

The obvious application of the miracle is to augment the physi- 
lost on the location. If the miracle is allowed to lapse before the 

cal resilience of a unit of cult warriors in battle. However, it can also 
regrowth has completed, the location remains maimed and unus- be used to strengthen a cult champion whilst the remainder of the 
able, potentially left at a negative Hit Point level which cannot be pious participants remain safely hidden or out of reach of combat. 
cured. 

SeEvVEerR SPpIirRIitT 
REeSsuURrRrEeCcTt 

Duration (Instant), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Preest, Resust 
Duration (Instant), Rank Priest, Resust (Special) 

(Endurance) 
This miracle can bring the dead back to life by summoning the 

This miracle severs the bond between body and soul, with dire 
spirit of the deceased and persuading it to re-enter its body. For obvi- effect. If not resisted, the victim is slain instantly. If however, the vic- 
ous reasons the theist must cast Resurrect upon the corpse, which tim does throw off the miracle, they still receive 1 point of damage 
must possess at a minimum, those body locations vital for life. If the 

for every 2 levels of Intensity to each Hit Location simultaneously — 
target died due to some lingering disease, poison or magical curse, which may, in some cases, still seriously injure or even kill the victim. 
the ailment must be eliminated first or the miracle will fail. 

Resurrection is not guaranteed. The deceased spirit will often SHhIieElLdD 
have desires which preclude their return to life. The spirit may fear Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate 
the hardship of their life, the lingering pain of wounds, persistent This miracle protects the caster from physical attacks. Each 
illnesses, the feebleness of old age or may even piously wish to reach point of Intensity grants the recipient one Armour Point on all hit 
their loved ones in the afterlife. On the other hand a spirit might locations. This protection does not stack on top of worn armour, 
wish to return from the dead to protect their family, seek vengeance rather it supplants it in those areas less protected than what the mir- 
against their killer or complete a holy quest. acle itself provides. In some circumstances, even if the protective 

To judge the primary motivation of the spirit, work out which value of the Shield is less than the worn armour, it may still ward 
of their passions or devotion skills has the highest value. If this indi- against certain types of magical damage. 
cates that the spirit will be unwilling to return to life, it may attempt 
to resist the miracle using that particular passion or Devotion skill. 

Resurrect must be cast within a number of days equal to the 
Magnitude of the spell after death, otherwise the miracle automati- 
cally fails. A resurrected character returns to life with 1 Hit Point on 
all extant locations. 

189



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

iIRACLES BY lT ANK SouLl SiIgGhHTt 
Miracles by Cult Rank Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate 

This miracle enables the recipient to see the magical aura of 
Initiate Spells Summanry anyone he looks at, enabling him to discern that creature or spirit’s 

Absorption Lay to Rest current Magic Points, as well as the nature of any active spells, the 

Aegis Lightning source of their magic, and any enchanted items the creature is car- 
rying. It also permits the recipient to see into the spirit world, and 

Backlash Madness 
see beyond any visual illusions which may be concealing a creature’s 

Behold Mindblast 
true form — although this may not necessarily be a good thing in 

Berserk Mindlink 
certain circumstances. 

Breathe Water Mirage 

Ciure Malady Perserverance SPpIirRIitT BLloOCckK 
Dismiss Elemental Reflection Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate 

Dismiss Magic Ripen Spirit Block is a powerful way of preventing the malign influ- 
ences of spirits. The recipient receives complete protection from 

Elemental Summoning Sacred Band 
spirits with an Intensity of up to half the Intensity of the miracle 

Enthrall Shield 
(rounded up). So an acolyte invoking the spell at an Intensity of 7 

Fear Soul Sight 
could protect themselves from Intensity 4 spirits. 

Tortify Spirit Block This miracle protects against spiritual assault only. Thus it pre- 
Harmonise Steadfast vents discorporation, spirit combat, possession, and the like. On the 
Heal Wound Sureshot other hand, it provides no warding against the spells of a Haunt or 

Tlusion True Weapon physical attacks of an incorporated Predator Spirit for example. 

SPpIirRIitT BLloOCckK EFfFfEeCcTtIivVeEnNEeSsSs 
Acolyte Spells Summary 

Intensity Recipient is Safe from Spirits of... 
Beast Form Exorcism 

1-2 Intensity 1 
Bind Ghost Fecundity 

3-4 Intensity 2 or lower 
Bless Crops Heal Body 

5-6 Intensity 3 or lower 
Call Winds Heal Mind 

7-8 Intensity 4 or lower 
Chameleon Leaching 

9-10 Intensity 5 or lower 

Clear Skies Pacify Each +2 +1 Intensity 

Cloud Call Propitiate 

Consecrate Raise Undead 
StTeEaADdFfAaSsTt 

Corruption Sunspear 
Area (Metres), Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate, Resist (Willpower) 

Cure Sense Thunderclap Used when facing overwhelming odds or terrifying challenges, 
Entangle this miracle renders those within its area immune to any natural 

mental or emotional manipulation. Magical attacks which generate 
a similar effect, such as Fear, Fanaticism, Domination, and the like, 

Priest Spells Summary 
must exceed the Magnitude of the miracle to stand a chance of 

Awaken 
affecting the target. 

Earthquake 

Excommuncation SuUNnSsPpEeaARr 
Extension Duration (Instant), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Acolyte, Resist (Evade) 

Growth Sunspear summons a shaft of blazing light down from the sky to 

Heart Seizure blast a single target. If not evaded, the scorching light will burn the 
victim for 1d6 damage per two points of Intensity in every hit loca- 

Obliterate 
tion. Natural and worn armour counts against this damage. This 

Rain of (Substance) 
miracle will only function in direct sunlight. 

Rejuvenate 

Resurrect SuURrEesShHoOTt 
Sever Spirit Duration (Minutes), Ranged (Tens of Metres), Rank Initiate 

Sureshot magically guides the trajectory of missiles thrown or 
fired by the recipient so that they almost always hit, no matter the 
situational modifiers or cover; provided at least some part of the 
target is visible, and they are within range of both the miracle and 
the weapon itself. Any failed ranged weapon attack roll is treated as 
a success instead. Fumbles, normal successes and critical successes 

190



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  THhEeIisSmM 

remain unaffected. The target of the missile attack can still attempt 
to Parry or Evade as normal. 

THhUuNnDdEeRrCcLlAaPp 
Area (Tens of Metres), Duration (Minutes), Rank Acolyte, Resist 

(Endurance) 
This miracle summons a powerful blast of thunder from the 

open sky, to smite down foes. All non-cult members must resist the 
magic. Those who fail are knocked prone by the expanding wall of 
sound, and struck deaf for the remainder of the miracle. Should 
anyone fumble the resistance roll against the spell, they are struck 
permanently deaf. Also, any items of glass or pottery will shatter 
automatically within the area of the spell. 

TRruUEe (WWEeAaPpOoNn)) 
Duration (Minutes), Rank Initiate 
True (Weapon) augments the harm the recipient inflicts when 

wielding a cult-specified close combat weapon. The miracle doubles 
that type of weapon’s damage up to the maximum that the weapon 
can inflict, and increases its Size by one step for the purpose of over- 
coming parries. Thus under the effects of a True (Sword) miracle 
the wielder would roll 1d8 twice for a broadsword, but would not 
receive more than 8 points. Other bonuses, such as Damage Modi- 
fier, are not affected. 

191



Mythras:  Cults & Brotherhoods

| G S | I R K K & M w =AW 

Cults & 
Brotherhoods

| mfi 
| G B | SR TR > > 

><> >z 
> Yy K« &« K [ AL TSR = B <Q i 

defining feature of MYTHRAS is its emphasis on mem- 

A bership of a cult — an organisation channelling belief, Cuurlrts 
behaviour and worship — to facilitate community and char- Cults are organisations which provide a formalised method of 

acter progression. As an evolution to this tradition, Brotherhoods worship or the teaching of magic. The nature of a cult is dependent 
have been included, being akin to cults but with an emphasis on on its focus of veneration. In MYTHRAS this reflects one of the higher 
professional, rather than religious or magically esoteric, fellowships magical disciplines: animism, mysticism, sorcery or theism. Animists 

Joining a cult or brotherhood depends entirely upon the cam- venerate the spirits and the spirit world; mystics venerate a particular 
paign setting. The Games Master need not include such organisa- form of teaching which leads to greater understanding and enlight- 
tions at all, but to leave them out overlooks their potential as a tool enment; sorcerers venerate the sorcerous principles they practice; 
to guide character development, and create bonds of social respon- theists worship a god or gods hoping to achieve a deeper and more 
sibility, camaraderie and even passions — all of which can be used to meaningful relationship with their deity. 
craft plots and adventures within the campaign. In most respects all cults work in a similar way. A series of ranks 

If they are to be included Games Masters should weave Cults within the cult mark depth of progression, knowledge and achieve- 
and Brotherhoods deeply into the cultures of his world. They should ment. The highest ranks lead and guide the lower ranks, and are 
be a fundamental aspect of everyday life just as religion, social clubs, party to the cult’s most formidable powers and deepest secrets. The 
and professional guilds still are today. Membership of such organisa- lowest ranks generally provide support for the cult in return for 
tions mould the opportunities and contacts provided to a character, mutual support, protection, and sometimes magical aid. Most never 
or conversely block advancement, and colour social opinion of them bother to advance up the cult ranks, and are happy to stay there, 
if they are not members. Thus they can be a powertul tool to hinder having no aspirations towards personal greatness, but simply seeking 
or reward characters, and naturally provide a welter of plot twists to asense of religious or philosophical fulfilment. 
a Games Master with little or no effort on his part. 

& Cults emphasise faith, spiritualism and philosophical prac- 
Although the terms are somewhat interchangeable, Cults are 

tices. They are focused upon the metaphysical. 
organisations which pursue active religious veneration or magical 

& Cults offer access to magic, but usually restrict its teaching 
powers as one of their key features; whereas Brotherhoods do not 

to more dedicated or professional members of higher rank. 
offer magical abilities (unless, of course, one creates a magical broth- 

However, those of the lowest ranks are normally permitted to 
erhood) but compensate with other facilities and resources focused 

petition senior members to cast magic on their behalf. 
more on career development. 

& Cult membership is very often open to all members of soci- 
Nothing prevents membership of several Cults and Brother- 

ety, but the higher ranks are vocational in their own right. 
hoods, unless they have been specifically denoted as being mutually 

Thus everyone in a tribe might be a member of the common 
exclusive in that setting. Both types of organisation add depth and 

totemic cult, but only those who dedicate themselves to the 
considerable opportunities for roleplaying:, and as we know from the 

path of the shaman can progress up the cult ranks. 
real world, cults, brotherhoods and secret societies abound — a key 

& Cults often have strictures on how their members demon- 
part of human social development and belonging. 

strate their veneration, with regular services, rituals, festivals, 
and the like. 

& Cults sometimes have restrictions about how and when they 
may be joined, and limitations upon later advancement. 
Membership may be limited to those of a certain age, passing 

192



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

a particular a rite of passage, being born to a certain caste, ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
and so on. Myceras 1s the patron god of Meeros. He s the guardian of its defenders, 

& Cults are usually an inherent part of communities and cul- and the strength of s walls, and all citizens off ree birth are inducted to his 
tures, subject to their social restrictions. worship when they serve in the city’s civic army. Only those who fulfil their 

malitary service are permatted to vote, thus the Cult of Myceras holds a posi- 
Depending on the setting, characters could enrol in more than 

tion of pre-eminent importance. 
one cult, assuming the cults are not antipathetic, and that more than 

As a chald Anathaym, watched herf ather depart to attend the secretive rites 
a single cult is available to one of their culture, status and profession. 

and ceremonies of the god. Frustrated, she has been forbidden to accompany 

M ham until she receies her first shield, and proves her knowledge of the arts 
yyssTtiiCcAaLl ORrDdEeRrSs of war on the sands outside the city walls. She longs to serve Myceras as a 
Mystical cults seek mystical harmony based on self-discipline, loyal warrior: 

meditation and deep contemplation. They orientate their teachings Kara, her sister; on the other hand, was chosen to_follow a different path. 
on philosophical concepts instead of supernatural beings, although Called by the god personally to serve as one of the priesthood, she has been 
they often revere the original source of their learning, be that a god tnvested as an initiale to act as the conduitfor Myceras® maraculous powers. 
or deified mortal. Thus a mystical cult can be as much of a religion The Scarlet Spears are an elite brotherhood of proven warriors serving 
as a theistic cult, albeit the focus being on self-enlightenment or tran- the Queen and “Temple directly. Meeros’s Champion is always drawn_from 
scendence, rather than direct veneration of any particular entity. the Scarlet Spears, and to wear their blood-red cloak is to atiract the highest 

respect and honour: 

SoORrCcEeRrYy ORrDdEeRrSs Anathaym, naturally, wants, more than anything, to join the Scarlet Spears 

Sorcery cults actively seek to understand, manipulate and con- as her father once did. She will need to prove herself in battle, and succeed 

trol the nature of the universe through research and study. Akin to in some great deed in service to the cily if she is to have any hope of joining 

mystical cults, the order might associate itself with a deity, demon 
or founder but the personage is not the primary focus of the cult, 

on. These organisations are known as ‘Brotherhoods’ (and, equally, 
at least not for the purposes of pursuing magical knowledge. Some- 

‘Sisterhoods’). 
what more esoteric than other types of cult, sorcery orders are gen- 

Examples of brotherhoods can range from the clandestine sup- 
erally modest organisations except in cultures which embrace sor- 

port and mutual protection of an organised thieves’ guild to the 
cery in every aspect of life. 

militaristic camaraderie of an elite unit of soldiers. Entry to these 
brotherhoods often requires some test of worthiness, and demon- 

SrpiiritT CUuLlTtSs stration of suitable prowess within the field that the group specialises 
Spirit cults venerate spirits and natural forces, such as ancestors, in. Despite being less metaphysically orientated, many brotherhoods 

nature spirits and elementals. Such spiritualistic worship can take still engage in ritual and follow strict rules of conduct, always alert 
many forms from simple shamanism to exotic types of totemic wor- to those members who’d transgress the rules set up to ensure mutual 
ship. In many ways spirit cults can be thought of as forerunners support, or the respect of the local community. 
of pantheism, but with spirits instead of gods. Spirit traditions can 
focus on an entire family of similar or related spirit types, or on a & Brotherhoods de-emphasise faith and religion. They may fig- 

powerful patron spirit which provides lesser spirits to its people. ure in the Brotherhood’s beliefs but other, more pragmatic 
values are central. 

T & Brotherhoods do not offer formalised access to magic. Indi- 
HheeIisTt CUuLlTtSs vidual members who are skilled magicians may teach magic 
Theist cults are those which worship a specific god or gods. The 

to other members, but this is very much an ad hoc affair. 
number of cults and scope of each depends on the theist culture. 

& Brotherhoods are very often vocationally orientated with the 
Some societies venerate only a single god (monotheism) whilst others 

aim of supporting members of similar careers, protecting 
venerate a group of deities known as a pantheon (pantheism). Indi- 

professional interests, and governing prices for services. 
vidual gods might be worshipped across many different societies but 

& Brotherhoods tend to be less constrained in their ways. Mem- 
in different ways. The same Hunter God might be worshipped by 

bers are not required to attend festivals or rituals for example, 
barbarian, civilised and nomadic cultures whereas the Trade God- and most members go about their daily lives calling on the 
dess is worshipped only by the civilised communities. Cult structures 

brotherhood when needed — but duties, save for the direct 
can therefore become quite sophisticated and even complex. officers of the Brotherhood — are far less formal than in cults. 

& Brotherhoods can generally be joined at any time. Member- 
ship is based upon competence or dedication towards an ideal 

BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs — not a rite of passage. 
& Brotherhoods are separate from communities and cultures. 

Despite the importance of cults to MYTHRAS they will not fit 
Although they operate within them, they transcend commu- 

all campaign settings. And even when they do, not all characters 
nity boundaries in ways cults cannot. 

want to become cultists. Yet history is scattered with examples of 
associations and societies, some secret, some not so secret, that fulfil Just as cults can have different magical or religious foci, brother- 
a similar role to cults but offer a different emphasis whilst giving hoods may also come in a variety of organisational structures with 
access to very similar resources — primarily support, training, and so very different purposes. 

193



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

COoMmPpAaNnIiEeSs WHhy JoOIinN? 
Companies are groups of people who band together to pursue a 

Most people are members of a cult or brotherhood, often join- 
particular purpose. By implication companies tend to be small, close 

ing several during their life. The choice of which ones a character 
knit associations which travel about, or perhaps gather together on a 

should join is dependent upon several things: race, culture and pro- 
seasonal basis. Examples are exclusive clubs of gentlemen explorers, 

fession. Unless the campaign world is a melting pot of different spe- 
wandering bands of entertainers, specialist mercenary units or even 

cies rubbing shoulders with one another, humans, for example, will 
merchant venturers. 

tend to join those Cults and Brotherhoods formed by other humans. 
Likewise inhabitants of a particular culture will normally only join 

COoLlLlEeGgEeSs organisations supported by that culture; and similarly with those 

Colleges are associations formed by those bound by academic who practice specific careers. 

achievement, or by seeking particular avenues of knowledge. Due to The natural choice will be a cult or brotherhood that is related 
their dependence on records, whether memorised, inscribed or writ- to the biggest part of his upbringing, but it need not be the lim- 
ten, more formal colleges are often bound to a particular location ited to that. Adventurers are rarely sedentary, and they gain greater 
where the brethren can congregate. Colleges can take the form of exposure to different cultures and viewpoints than most who never 
monastic scholars serving a great library, travelling bards gathering leave their home communities. The choice of cult, whether done at 

and passing on news, a secret order of seekers after a lost artefact, character creation or later, through play, raises a few questions that 

and so on. it is worth taking the time to consider: 

& How will your character be viewed by your community and 
GAaNnGgSs peers? Joining an antagonistic or enemy organisation could 

Gangs are localised organisations of small scale, led by the most have profound repercussions for personal safety. 
dominant member and usually self-serving. Most are formed to alle- & What Cults and Brotherhoods do your fellow characters 
viate boredom, garner a little money or as a means of protection belong to? Again, striking a pose that is at odds with those 
against rival gang persecution. This is not always the case, however. you adventure with could introduce difficulties and tensions 
Some gangs form for the purpose of instilling order in societies that might otherwise be avoided. 
which lack formal law enforcement, or to ensure respect is paid to & What is your character’s goal regarding membership? What 
local people, businesses or even gods. Examples often take the form sort of relationship and personal power is being sought? 
of street gangs of adolescent youths, self-elected neighbourhood All Cults and Brotherhoods offer power of some kind, but 
watches, bands of criminal cutthroats or even informal unions of there is always a personal cost attached to it: a commitment. 
labourers. Committing to a particular path that one might later come 

to regret or become disillusioned with could again make life 

GuuIiLlDdSs very difficult. 

Guilds are bodies who regulate the teaching and practice of a & How far do you intend your character to progress within the 

particular profession. Fundamentally economic in nature, guilds organisation? Many characters remain as lay members or 

often establish a stranglehold over all those who would carry on that novices, but higher standing brings greater power and pres- 

craft or trade — taking a tithe of each member’s earnings in return tige — always at some cost. To embrace the benefits of higher 

for protection, market stability, and a formalised recognition of the rank, what are you prepared to sacrifice? 

quality of their products. Guilds often have great reach, spreading Choosing a cult should not be a knee-jerk choice or one that is 
across entire nations rather than being limited to a single urban set- seen to offer rapid power with no commitment in the short term. 
tlement. As such they can have very diverse objectives depending on A character ought not to join a war cult simply because he is good 
the craft, for instance a Sea Traders’ Guild may have an outpost in with a weapon and likes killing: he should join it if his father was a 
every civilised city with a port, whilst a thieves’ guild may be limited great warrior, because he wishes to follow a martial profession, and 
to operating in a particular ward of a single town. because he wants to ensure that the enemies of his community are 

defeated. 

REeGgIimMEeNnTtSs Players should look carefully at the cult and brotherhoods as they 

Regiments are military bodies who form an identity based on relate to their character’s culture, community;, background and per- 

their prowess, style of fighting, arms and equipment, or even their sonal desires. Make the choice based on certain informed decisions. 

duty. Their primary purpose is mutual support, ensuring that indi- Cuults and Brotherhoods, once joined, are more than simply a mag- 

vidual members work together as a team, and providing camarade- ical or religious club; they are faiths, and faiths are often vengeful if 

rie when not on campaign. Regiments are often passionate about their principles are ignored or betrayed. 

their ¢lan or reputation. They can be anything from elite royal body- The Games Master is also the ultimate arbiter when it comes 

guards to mercenary legions feared for their brutality. to cult and brotherhood choices. He may, quite reasonably, restrict 
membership only to those who appear both suitable and sincere. If 
so, then the character must either accept the restrictions or simply 
choose not to initiate into a cult or brotherhood until later, when 
more options, determined through actual play, are open to him. 

194



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

MEeMmBEbeRrSsHhIiPp 
Characters can join Cults and Brotherhoods in one of two ways: 
1. Aspartof character creation. 
2. During game-play, as they learn more about their game 

world, and the organisations working within it. 

Membership is not mandatory — but characters who join a 
group are likely to have access to certain benefits and resources that 
non-members will either be denied or find difficult to obtain. Some 
thought should also be given to the roles these faiths and fraternities 
play in most societies: 

& Individuals usually inherit their parents’ and community’s 
beliefs, and are exposed to these attitudes and rituals day-in, 
day-out throughout their childhood and adolescence. Initiat- 
ing into a family or community cult is a natural progression, 
and even desired by many young people. 

& Individuals likewise inherit the same profession as their 
parents, usually working as children to help their father or 
mother perform their tasks. Thus parents often expect their 
offspring to follow them into the same career, and thereby 
brotherhood. 

& Cults are very often the basis for community. Not joining or 
initiating results in social stigma, or even exile or ostracism. 
Social pressure may be too difficult for some individuals to 
avoid. Brotherhoods may similarly have a major influence at 
the family level, perhaps forming a stranglehold on a particu- 
lar craft or employment, and forbidding non-members from 
performing that type of work. 

As MYTHRAS by default creates characters who are either just 
entering adulthood or who are young adults, cult membership may part of the rite of passage from youth to adult, which has created 
therefore be a highly desirable, or an unavoidable, part of character a relationship with the organisation. They follow its principles and 
creation. general beliefs, but gain no special advantages beyond the support it 

provides its members. 

MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp aASs PAaRrTt oOFf Characters who start off as professional magicians of a cult are 
permitted to begin one rank higher, being assumed to have success- 

CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr CRrEeAaTtIioOnN fully undergone the Initiation Ceremony or ritual associated with 

During the Careers and Development stages of character cre- the cult. Following the initiation ritual the character undergoes a 

ation (see chapter 2) players may opt to initiate into a cult or brother- period of training where he studies with the cult’s teachers and 

hood. Joining at the character creation stage offers certain benefits: elders so that he becomes an active and productive member of the 
cult. This training is considered part of the overall character cre- 

& Membership provides immediate context for the character, ation process. At the end of it the character emerges with the magic 
helping define and identify who he is, what he believes, and skills associated with the cult’s nature. 
where he belongs in the world. 

& Having several characters be members of the same or simi- 
lar organisations, even if they are from different backgrounds MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp dDUuRrIinNgG tThHEe GAaMmEe 
and professions, provides a ready-made reason for them to Many characters will join a cult or brotherhood during the 

be associating and working together at the start of the game. course of play. They may come across a cult that matches their ide- 
als at that time or find a calling that requires a particular religious 

Joining a cult or brotherhood during character creation requires or behavioural approach that only a particular kind of organisation 
no rolls for entry. It is assumed that the initiation forms a natural can serve. 
part of the character’s progression from childhood to adulthood. Joining a cult or brotherhood during play requires a number of 

MyTHRAS divides membership into several levels that reflect things: 
dedication or devotion to the organisation. The levels are explained 
in more detail later in this chapter, but any character who joins a 1. A demonstration that one is worthy of joining the group. 
cult or brotherhood during character creation is considered a Com- 2. Impressing the organisation’s leaders to gain membership. 
mon Member with the actual title being based on its nature. The 3. A donation of some kind. 
character has undergone some form of formal initiation, usually as 

195



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

DEeMmOoNnSTstRrAaTtIioONnSs oOFf WOoRrTtHhINinEeSsSs Masters should not necessarily feel restricted by this distribution. If, 

Such things will vary, but usually the character will need to show in your campaign, the barbarian culture has a mystical tradition, 

that he embodies the same ideals, has similar religious or philosoph- then allow that type of cult. 

ical beliefs, and understands what the organisation is striving to do. 
BAaRrBbAaRrIiaAnN 

A character may have performed a service for the prospective organ- 
Spirit Cult, Theist Cult. 

isation, or simply acted as a common member for a time (usually a 
year, but sometimes less), thereby impressing the local leadership. Ciiviluisedp 
The cult or brotherhood may require a service to be performed 

Mystical Order, Sorcery Order, Theist Cult. 
— such as a quest or task that confirms the candidate’s suitability. 
Certain background checks may be performed, and a character’s NooMmAaDdIiCc 
reputation assessed. Spirit Cult, Theist Cult. 
A character might be asked to renounce a particular mode of 

behaviour, previous belief or way of life. For example someone who PrrRiImMIitTiIvVeE 
has spent his career as a mercenary and now wants to join a healing Spirit Cult. 

cult might be required to foreswear his violent past. Sometimes the 
choices can be tough, but worthwhile. 

This demonstration of worthiness must be quantifiable within 
the game. That is to say, the character must have done, or will do PRrOoGgRrEeSsSsIioOnN 
something, during play, to aptly demonstrate his worthiness. It is Once a character has joined a cult or brotherhood they often seek 

usually not enough to have a player say that something has or will be to rise in the organisation’s ranks, in the pursuit of greater respect, 

done: one must show, not tell. reputation or responsibility or simply out of a thirst for knowledge 
and power. Progression is sometimes limited by the nature of the 

ImMPpRrEeSsSsiInNgG TthHEe EXxAaMmIiNnEeRrSs organisation; cults might only grant access to the higher ranks to 
Demonstrations of worthiness must be substantiated. Characters those who are professional magicians. Others might slow advance- 

need to convince the cult or brotherhood’s leaders of their suitabil- ment according to the skills of the character, his completion of a 
ity. Assuming worthiness has been demonstrated, impressing the suitably heroic task or even block promotion until a space in the 
examiners can be abstracted with a roll against a suitable skill. For ranks opens up. 
instance, entry into a criminal street gang may require a demon- Such considerations are, as always, dependent on the campaign 
stration of a skill like Stealth, Sleight or Streetwise. If the roll is setting, and how quickly the Games Master wishes to allow char- 
successful then the examiners have been sufficiently impressed to acters to advance. The following guidelines are simply suggestions 
extend membership. Characters can augment their required roll in from which a Games Master can develop his own novel cult or 
the following ways: brotherhood structures. For instance the skill requirements of rank 

can be adjusted to ease progression. 
& Use of an appropriate Passion. 

It should always be remembered that just because a character 
& Use of an appropriate Communication skill such as Influ- 

might meet the mechanistic requirements of a particular rank that 
ence, Deceit or Oratory. 

doesn’t automatically grant them the right to achieve it. Promotion 
& Membership of an allied cult or brotherhood. 

within a cult or brotherhood is a very major reward, and should be 
& A suitably impressive donation. 

something strived for by roleplaying. In fact it is encouraged that 

Impressing the examiners leads to the character becoming a cach advancement is somehow played out as a separate adventure 

Common Member of the new cult, irrespective of his station in or test to grant further depth to the organisation. 

society or rank in another organisation. From there he can rise in 
the new group as any other member. 

DooOnNAaTtIioOnNSs RAaNnKkSs 
Usually monetary, but sometimes the presentation of services, Most Cults and Brotherhoods are arranged in a pyramidal hier- 

goods or property seals the bargain. It shows final commitment to archy. Common members form the base of the pyramid, and are the 

the cult or brotherhood’s community, just as the previous demon- most numerous members of the organisation. These are regarded 

strations have proved suitability. It is difficult to quantify how high as part time supporters, affiliate members or retired comrades who 

or substantial a donation should be, and Games Masters will need may associate in any number of cults or brotherhoods, provided it is 

to weigh up the offering based on other factors. However if the done as part of their spare time. 

donation is substantial in nature, no matter what form it takes, then Higher ranks represent professional members of the organisa- 

Games Masters should make the demonstration of worthiness skill a tion, working or being educated full time under its edicts. Numbers 

step easier for the character. diminish as one advances up through the ranks until a handful of 
individuals, or even only one, occupy the upper echelons. Promotion 
brings greater privilege, prestige, learning, and sometimes magic or 

AVvAaIiLlAaBbIiLlIitTyY bByY CUuLlTtuURrEe
other benefits. The heroes, movers and shakers generally fill the 

 highest ranks with the devoted, yet relatively inactive, faithful form- 

The general availability of these cults is suggested in the list ing the lower tiers. 

of Cultural Background and Cult Types below. However Games 

196



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

COoMmPpAaRrAaTtIiVvEe RAaNnKk TIitTLlEeSs 

Theist Cult Animist Cult Sorcery Order Mpystical Order Brotherhood 

Common Lay Member Tollower Novice Aspirant Associate 

Dedicated Initiate Spirit Worshipper Apprentice Student Apprentice 

Proven Acolyte Shaman Adept Disciple Journeyman 

Overseer Priest High Shaman Mage Master Master 

Leader High Priest Spirit Lord Arch Mage Sage Grand Master 

Different Cults and Brotherhoods have different names for their donation. Most cults will be reticent to perform such magics for 
ranks. The table below shows the default rank names arranged by non-members, as the cult’s resources will often be stretched just to 
cach organisation’s type and the membership level. Rank names can satisty their own brethren, although the purpose or the cult may 
vary according to setting, but the following are included for ease of influence this. 
reference to the magic chapters. 
A description of each rank follows, outlining their place in the DEeDdIiCcAaTtEedD 

hierarchy, requirements, duties, benefits and magic. 
This is the start of the inner membership of the cult or brother- 

hood, requiring the member to commit themselves fully to serve the 
ComMMmOoNn organisation. Much of this time is spent performing the drudge work 

The first step in joining a cult or brotherhood is to become a required to keep the organisation running, or at least that which can- 
common member. A character can belong to several organisations not be given over to common members. In addition the dedicated 
as a common member, provided they do not have conflicting pur- member is expected to learn and practice those skills which the cult 
poses or are diametrically opposed. The vast majority of members or brotherhood deems important. 
of any organisation are common members; casual practitioners or Since this rank represents the lowest level of professional com- 
worshippers who follow doctrine, and attend regular meetings and mitment to a cult or brotherhood, it is difficult for a character to 
ceremonies, depending on its nature. be a dedicated member of more than one organisation at a time, 

Common rank reflects the type of folks who are faithful worship- except for closely related or mutually supporting organisations. It 
pers of a religion, rarely called up levies of a city guard, subscribing should denote those studying for proficiency in a career, such as a 
members of the beggars’ guild, and so on. In effect they are those neophyte sorcerer enrolled at a university, a low ranking legionary 
who have a level of part time commitment to a cult or brotherhood training his martial skills or a young cutpurse learning the arts of 
whilst engaged in a different career. thievery at his guild. 

REeQqUuIiRrEemMEeNnTtSs REeQqUuIiRrEemMEeNnTtSs 
Common members must have at least a basic understanding of Dedicated members will have their knowledge and abilities 

the beliefs of the organisation, and make a small donation (of time tested to determine their sincerity and eligibility. To be adopted by 
or money) each time they visit the cult’s shrine or temple or to pay the cult or brotherhood the character must know at least five of the 
brotherhood dues. cult’s skills at 50% or more. 

DuuTtiies 
Common members have few duties. They are expected to attend 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
important celebrations, festivals or meetings specific to the organi- 

The preeminentf aith in Meeros, those belonging to the Cult of Myceras 
sation, but need not attend every one provided they maintain some 

are granted rights of full citizenship in exchange for being called upon to_fill 
minimal commitment. For example Lay Members of a theistic cult 

the armoured files of the army in times of war. Since such rights are not 
would partake in special high Holy Day celebrations, but unless they 

heredutary, membershup in s excluswe ranks s the most sort afler in the city. 
are aiming to rise in the ranks of the cult, they will not be expected 

Desprte this, and other significant benefits, the inability for warriors to 
to attend regular ceremonies. 

progress beyond lay membership rankles with Anathaym as she wanis to serve 

PRrIiVvIilLeEgGEeSs Myceras as_fully as she can, and learn the cult’s secrets. Kara, who under- 

Common members will be able to find tutors for any skills the stands these things better than her sister; explains that the priesthood is a 

cult teaches. However they must still pay the normal training or Calling. Those who want to progress fully within the cult must give-up their 

tuition rates for a tutor’s services. They may seek the aid of the previous lives and careers, dedicating themselves wholly to Myceras. 

organisation for protection, support, sanctuary, and consultation for You would beforbidden from lifting a spear; drawing a sword or holding 

personal problems. a shield,” Kara says, patiently. ‘Myceras has chosen you to be one of his 
warriors; he gave you those talents. Be content with them, andyou will find 

MAaGgIiCc other ways to prosper.’ 

Common members of cults are rarely taught magic, although Reluctantly Anathaym accepts that she would rather be a warrwor than 
much depends on the setting. Instead common members have the a priest, and so sels her sights firmly on_joining the Scarlet Spears as soon as 

right to request magic be performed on their behalf, for a suitable she can. 

197



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

Duuttiies DuuTtiies 
Characters are expected to work or study full time unless specif- Proven members are expected to take charge of the management 

ically sent off to perform tasks or adventures. If possible they must and education of lower ranking members. They must also attend 
also attend all ceremonies, festivals or meetings. all ceremonies, services, and meetings essential to the organisation; 

and to be active in expanding the cult’s membership and influence. 
PRrIiVvIilLeEgGEeSs 

Dedicated members receive communal bed and board at tem- PRrIiVvIilLeEgGEeSs 
ples, guild halls, garrisons or wherever their organisation is located. Proven members may requisition equipment and materials nec- 
Some also offer a small income depending on whether they provide essary for cult or brotherhood business. They can also commandeer 
goods or services as part of their membership. In addition they are lower ranks to provide any necessary support. In addition they are 
provided access to trainers, but do not have to pay full rates for such paid a stipend suitable to their status, and provided with their own 
tuition. personal chambers in whatever settlement or building they are 

stationed. 
MAaGgIiCc 

Dedicated members are eligible to learn the magic taught by that MAaGgIiCc 
cult. As for dedicated members, but with access to certain rank 

restricted abilities. 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
As a Lay Member of the cult, Anathaym is expected to attend a few key OVvEeRrSsEeEerR 

religious celebrations each year. The praising of Myceras defeating Yethis the The most senior members of each cult congregation or broth- 
demon-snake, which coincides with the founding of the city; and the annual erhood order, overseers are those schooled in its deepest secrets 
purtfication of weapons at the beginning and end of the campaign season. and procedures. Their primary responsibilities are to arrange the 
Additionally she us required to answer any summons to muster the army bureaucratic or metaphysical running of the local organisation, giv- 
whether to attack an enemy or defend the city. ing orders to lower ranking members. Whilst most of their time is 

In exchange _for her oaths, Anathaym is granted access to tuition in any taken up with these duties, overseers are provided with a greater 
of the city’s civic combat styles, free repair of her arms and armour tf broken degree of autonomy, and may formulate their own plans, provid- 
wn the service of Myceras, and the right to sleep on thefloor of any shrine or ing they do not contradict the requirements or objectives of the 
temple of the god. organisation. 

Last, but by no means least, lay members are permitted to request cult Overseers are often the superiors of their assigned branch 
maracles to be cast on thetr behalf — for as many silvers asfoes they cut down or temple, subdividing responsibilities between themselves if the 
under its blessing. A few folk maguc spells are also available to any warrior organisation is particularly large. Members of this rank are akin to 
who wishes to learn the skill, but the costs and efforts are significant enough military captains, guild masters or the head shaman of a tribe. A 
thatfew partake in the opportunity provided by the preesthood. temple priest for example, would look after an entire congregation 

and place of worship. 

REeQqUuIiRrEemMEeNnTtSs 
Overseers must have been proven members of the cult or broth- 

PRroOVvEenN erhood for a minimum of five years, and must know at least three 

Few members of a cult or brotherhood will rise to the position cult skills at 90% or better. 

of Proven, a rank that requires dedication and service but where the 
Duurmtiies 

inner secrets of the organisation begin to be revealed. With the rank 
Overseers are expected to lead all of the important ceremonies, 

comes a degree of independence and responsibility; proven mem- 
services and meetings of the organisation. They act as administrators, 

bers are given some authority over lower ranks, be that organising 
being responsible for both finances and any political manoeuvrings 

the daily duties, command of troops or the education of novices. 
required to maintain the status (and authority) of the organisation. 

On the other hand a proven member regains a degree of liberty and 
can utilise whatever free time they have to engage their own pursuits. PRrIiVvIilLeEgGEeSs 

Proven members are often sent off to new locales or encouraged 
Overseers may demand any of the resources available to their 

to travel to finish off their schooling. Examples of characters of 
branch of the organisation. They can also commandeer any or all 

this rank would be journeyman craftsmen, mercenary sergeants or 
of the lower ranked members or congregation to provide support for 

shrine attendants. 
their plans. However unless these are used to further the organisa- 

REeQqUuIiRrEemMEeNnTtSs tion as a whole, abuse of this power can lead to an alienation from 
the brethren. If desired overseers can draw on the cult or brother- 

Proven members must have been a dedicated member of the cult 
hood’s funds to pay themselves a high wage, and are provided with 

or brotherhood for a minimum of three years, and must know at 
the best living quarters available. 

least four cult skills at 70% or better. A valuable gift or service must 
be rendered to the cult, to demonstrate devotion and loyalty. MAaGgIiCc 

Overseers gain full access to all magic available to that 
organisation. 

198



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

KRrAaTtOoSs'’ SaAgGaA Most attempt to advance the standing, reach and power of the 

Kratos has reached the pinnacle of his powen, quite literally the right hand organisation, but others become drawn to seeking out further magi- 

claw of Yetfus the demon lord. His efforts have recreated the Order of the cal secrets, deeper enlightenment or even transcendence to divinity. 

Stygian Path, a sorcerous cult which spreads the potent, yetf oul black magic 
PRrIiVvIilLeEgGEeSs 

taught by the diabolical serpent. Most of the cult members are hus centaurs, 
Leaders may utilise the entire resources and personnel of the cult 

augmented by numbers of ophidians, and even a gorgon. Few of them have 
or brotherhood in any way they desire. They may even attempt to 

mands capable of comprehending the aris of sorcery, so they remain common 
change the very precepts of the organisation, corrupting or evolving 

members who partake in the ritual sacrifices to the demon lord. 
its nature. 

A handful of the ophidians however take to the teachings of the Stygian 
Path, and these he mercilessly corrupts with the dark knowledge of their pro- MAaGgIiCc 
genator. After many years Kratos achieves the title and rank of Arch Mage by 

Cult leaders may try to master new powers or abilities of surpass- 
the grace of lus demonic mentor. As a reward the demon promases to teach the 

ing potency, beyond the nominal scope of the cult; at a significant 
arch mage a secret ritual which will invest the sorcerer with part of Yethus’s 

risk of bringing doom or disaster if their attempt fails. 
own power; making kim both Immortal and Invulnerable to weapons. 

To prepare lamself for the ritual of gifl giving, Kralos takes ever increas- 
ing amounts of mind expanding lotus dust lo create the necessary condut 
through which he must recewe the diabolical gifi. When the time comes, Kratos BEeNnEeFfIiTtSs 
gathers together the entire cult, and begins a three day ritual to open a portal The following section further emphasises the benefits of joining 
lo Yetfus in the underworld. The ceremony inwvolves much debauchery and a cult or brotherhood. These are only suggestions and guidelines 
sacrifwe, but at its climax something goes dreadfully wrong. which should be used to encourage imaginative design. 

As the wards imprisoning the demon lord sunder, Kratos belatedly realises 
he has been tricked, and is a mere tool which Yethis has used to gain lus own TRrAaIinNIinNgG 
freedom. The sorcerer screams as he ts possessed by the demon, his skin turning 

Common members of an organisation are offered training but 
scaly, and eyes to burning slits, whilst a thick tail slowly grows,from under his 

must pay for the pleasure. Although this may not sound like a bene- 
robes. All prostrate themselves before the demon lord, who bellows in triumph, 

fit, it may be the case that the cult or brotherhood are the only ones 
and slaps the ground with hus serpent tarl with the sound of a thunderclap. Far 

who offer tuition in that particular field, especially when it comes to 
away in Meeros the earth trembles... 

professional skills. 
Higher ranks are offered training as a matter of course, since it 

LeEaAdDEerR is partly their purpose to ensure their members are well skilled in 
the areas the cult or brotherhood holds dear. This training may or 

The autocrats, spiritual heads and heroes of cults or brother- 
may not be ‘free’ but is likely to have been paid for by the member’s 

hoods, leaders are masters of everything the cult stands for, and 
parents or guardian if enrolled as a youth, or maintenance costs 

guide its future. When trouble threatens the organisation, it is they 
covered by duties the member performs under the auspices of the 

who will fight for its survival and prosperity; not necessarily by arm- 
organisation. 

ing themselves with weapons, and calling upon the greatest magic, 
The level and competence of trainers and teachers depend 

but more often by Machiavellian manipulation — laying down long 
entirely on the size and presence of the organisation, but since train- 

term strategies and sending out prominent, or perhaps expendable, 
ing is one of the major advantages of being a cult or brotherhood 

members to enact their plans. 
member, Games Masters should not be too restrictive about provid- 

Reaching the lofty pinnacles of this rank places the entire cult 
ing access to such aid. 

or brotherhood into their hands to do with as they will. Leaders 
As a rule of thumb, use the following to determine training dis- 

are often charismatic commanders of legions, holy patriarchs of a 
counts based on rank: 

national religion or skulking arch sorcerers working to overthrow 
kingdoms from the shadows. Although the rank implies singular 
authority, many organisations may possess more than one who form 

Training Discount 
a council, such as a secret conclave of master thieves whom control 
a thieves’ guild from behind the scenes. Common 0% 

REeQqUuIiRrEemMEeNnTtSs Dedicated 25% 

Proven 50% 
Leaders must have been overseers for a minimum of least ten 

years, and must have at least two cult skills at 110% or better. They Overseer 75% 

must also have performed an invaluable service for the cult or broth- Leader 100% 

erhood, worthy of recognition as a future guide or custodian; or 
they must remove the previous leader by whatever means necessary PRrOoTtEeCcTtIioOnN 
to seize his power. Members of a cult or brotherhood can expect to be protected by 

that organisation, provided of course the character has not trans- 
Duuttiies 

gressed any rules of membership (see Taboos and Geasa below). 
Leaders are effectively free to pursue any course of action 

The type of protection offered depends entirely on what the charac- 
they desire, provided that the overseers beneath them are suitably 

ter is threatened with. 
schooled and able to function independently of direct management. 

199



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

and weapons, for example, or someone joining 
the carpenters guild as an apprentice be given 
woodworking tools. 

Some organisations endow their members 
with a small wage in addition to bed and board. 
Such stipends are usually modest at the lower 
ranks, but can provide a great deal of wealth 
at upper levels. Much depends on donations 
provided by common members, payments 
the organisation collects from undertaking 
commissions and any supplementary tithes it 
receives from land ownership or taxation pow- 
ers granted it. 

Material aid need not be limited to only 
full time members. A lay member of a theistic 
religion might request support from his cult in 
times of personal misfortune. Such assistance 
could take the shape of a simple charitable gift 
to help them over a brief period of financial 
difficulty, up to something as significant as call- 
ing his religious brethren together to rebuild 
the member’s home if it were destroyed in an 
carthquake. 

Other financial and materialistic benefits 
are limitless in scope. Trade deals, political 
support during elections, physical attendance 
during sickness, funeral services, and so on. In 
historical and fantasy settings where the con- 
cept of communal welfare is completely alien, 
Cuults and Brotherhoods are the only source of 
this vital support. 

SOoCcIiaALl STtaAtTuUSs 
A more abstract reward of membership is 

that of social status. Any benefit this provides 
is purely dependent on the standing or the 
cult or brotherhood in the local community. A 
member of a mercenary company, for exam- 

Physical protection or protection against arrest may be as simple 
ple, may gain little status, being regarded as barely more than scum 

as secking sanctuary at the nearest shrine or holy place, provided of 
by the inhabitants of a city, although he might still be treated with 

course that those pursuing him are forbidden to enter such sanctums. 
wary respect; whereas a member of the masons’ guild could expect 

On the other hand a member may request somebody be assigned 
deferential treatment, and invitations to exclusive society functions. 

to act as a personal guardian. For instance a retired member of a 
Much depends on how important the organisation is in that cul- 

Military Brotherhood whose standing may have lapsed to that of a 
ture. Wealth, religious standing, political influence, popular opinion 

common member, could reasonably request protection from his old 
and dangerousness all play an important role in its determination. 

regiment which — out of esprit de corps — assigns a couple of soldiers 
to go and deal with the problem. 

Shelter can also take the form of legal or political protection, the MAaGgIiCc 
organisation using its standing to discourage active persecution of Although specifically restricted to cults, the provision of magic is 
its members. already documented in the previous rank descriptions and examples 

given in each magical discipline chapter. Yet the fundamental con- 

MAaTtEeRrIiAaLl AIidD cept of magic availability should be considered further. 
By default MYTHRAS assumes that only those who progress above 

Members may also benefit from material aid provided by their 
the rank of Common Member are permitted access to the skills of 

cult or brotherhood. Food and lodging has previously been men- 
magic casting. This has been adopted to enable the creation of faiths 

tioned as a privilege, but this is not the only assistance which can 
which don’t automatically provide magical powers to all of their 

be given. An organisation may provide those who join them full 
brethren. Yet there is nothing to stop a Games Master from doing 

time with the tools of their trade, a newly admitted warrior into a 
exactly this, if he desires to create a particularly magical setting. 

mercenary company might be provided with a set of basic armour 

200



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

In such cases joining cults should be confined to particular pro- intervene, and intervention may only be staged if the god has some 
fessions, or that type of magic may lose its exclusivity. In those cases stake in the outcome. Neither can the form of intervention be dic- 
where a cult offers more than a single type of magic, Games Masters tated or controlled by the plaintiff: a god cannot be compelled to smite 
could grant training in the ‘lesser’ magic to common members whilst a priest’s foes with hails of fire or to pummel a coastal town with a 
reserving the ‘higher’ magics to those of more advanced rank. tidal wave. The god (and therefore the Games Master) always decides 

Conversely Games Masters may restrict access to magic to how it will intervene and to what extent. The intervention may be 
higher ranks, and indeed it is reccommended that more potent spells, obvious and crude, or inconspicuous and subtle. Much depends on 
miracles, spirits and talents be withheld to specific membership lev- the god, its nature, its motives, and what it is intervening for. 
els, so that a character must prove himself for years before gaining To invoke Divine Intervention involves the following: 
knowledge of those powerful abilities. 

& The plaintiff must be an active member of a theist cult and 
be of Priest or High Priest rank. 

GIiFfTtSs & The plaintiff must not have made a call for intervention 
Gifts are secret teachings provided to those who advance far within the last month. 

enough in a cult or brotherhood to be trusted with their knowledge. & The plaintiff must have an active Devotional Pool (i.e., there 
The nature of a gift can be either magical or mundane according must be Magic Points within it). 
to the wishes of the Games Master and the setting. They are often, &« The plaintift makes a Hard Devotion roll, if a High Priest, 
although not exclusively, restricted to those of highest rank. or a Formidable Devotion roll, if a priest. Success indicates 

These Gifts vary hugely from organisation to organisation. Some that the god has heard the plea, and will respond in a way 
offer them and some do not. Gifts can take the form of treasures, decided by the Games Master but in keeping with the god’s 
relics, unique spells, lost knowledge, and even special powers granted nature and power. 
by extra dimensional entities. Those blessed with their possession are & The help provided by the god results in the plaintiff’s Devo- 
expected to use these Gifts to further the cult or brotherhood’s aims: tion skill being reduced by 1d4+1%. 
abusing them can lead to their removal, and possibly other sanctions 
against the miscreant. The availability of Divine Intervention is dependent on the set- 

Whilst Gifts depend very much on the type of organisation, some ting. In traditional Swords and Sorcery stories the gods are distant, 

examples, with their game effects, are provided below. These are not often uncaring and unwilling to intervene on behalf of their suppli- 

exhaustive nor prescriptive: Games Masters may invent others to cants; in High Fantasy settings intervention may be more common. 

suit the nature of the campaign. 
A Gift is reward for loyalty, service and commitment: it is not 

a power gained simply for attaining a certain level. It is up to the REeSsTtRrIicCtTiIoOnNSs 
Games Master to decide whether a character has proven his worth 

Joining a cult or brotherhood is more than simply passing a test 
to the higher echelons — granting the Gift as an unforeseen reward 

and then carrying-on as before, reaping the rewards of membership. 
—or to provide the opportunity to gain such powers in game, depen- 

There are restrictions involved in maintaining the necessary faith, 
dent on the successful completion of a challenging quest or service. 

dedication or bonds of loyalty to the principles held by the cult or 
A selection of sample Gifts are given on page 202. 

brotherhood. Some organisations deliberately embrace these restric- 
Gifts can work in one of several ways: 

tions in order to make membership challenging or exclusive. 
The usual methods used to ensure that only the most dedicated 

1. The Gift works simply when called upon. 
and faithful join the ranks of an organisation are those of oaths, 

2. The Gift costs 1 Magic Point to invoke. It may cost more, 
superstitions, taboos and geasa. Games Masters are encouraged to 

depending on the nature of the Gift. 
use a variety of these, not only establishing each cult and brother- 

3. The Gift requires a successful roll to invoke. The roll used 
hood with its own unique feel, but also granting some interesting 

depends on the nature of the cult. For Theists the roll would 
aspects to roleplaying one of their membership. 

be against Devotion. For Sorcerers, against Shaping. For 
Some organisations may only have one or two restrictions to 

Animists, against Trance. For Mystics, against Meditation. 
become, and remain, a member. Others might possess more draco- 

4. The Gift requires a roll, and an expenditure of Magic Points. 
nian constraints, forcing new restrictions with each increase of rank. 

The method of managing Gifts depends very much on campaign In history there are examples of priests tied up with so many highly 
style. Heroic campaigns might have Gifts working simply when proscriptive edicts that they could barely leave their own homes or 
called to do so. More gritty, realistic play would call for either Magic temples for fear of transgressing some rule! 
Points or a roll. A low-magic campaign might require a roll, and 
Magic Point expenditure. Choose in advance how Gifts will be man- OAaTtHhSs 
aged to so that characters’ expectations when pursuing and receiv- 

Belonging to a cult or brotherhood requires loyalty. Failing in 
ing a Gift are also managed. 

that loyalty results in repercussions ranging from rebuke to death, 
depending on the nature of the group and the degree of infraction. 

D1iVvIinNEe InNtTeErRvVeEnNTtiIoOnN Loyalty is pledged in the form of an Oath. 
Theist cults may benefit from Divine Intervention — that is, the An oath is more than just a promise to abide by the organisation’s 

god intervening directly in mortal affairs, usually in response to rules. It is a pledge of allegiance and commitment on a par with 
a prayer from a beloved worshipper. No god is ever compelled to making a lifelong devotion to a god, which in some cases is exactly 

201



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

SaAmMPpLlEe GIiFfTtSs 
Gift Effect 

Abstinence Exist without one requirement for life, for example air, food, water, sleep. 

Alacrity The character rolls 1d6+6, rather than 1d10, for Initiative. 

Animal Fomiliar The recipient receives the companionship of a natural animal. The familiar obeys simple commands but will not go against its nature. The animal’s 

Average SIZ cannot exceed the character’s POW. 

Clhange Gender The character changes from male to female or vice-versa. All characteristics and skills remain the same but the voice and physical functions of the 

new sex are gained. 

Chaotic Blessing Roll once on the Chaos features table on pages 275 to 276. 

Cult Evolution The character can add a new spell, miracle, spirit or talent to the cult’s magical tradition. 

Elemental Gain an elemental helper which may be called once per adventure. 

LEternal Life The recipient will not die of natural causes during the lifetime of the gift, although they are still vulnerable to death through violence. 

Healthy The character’s Healing Rate is doubled. 

Insightful The character is immediately aware of the enemies of the cult and those who would directly harm him. 

Invulnerability Character is invulnerable to damage from one specified source: weapons, falling, poison, fire or something similar. 

Lucky When rolling for any skill test, the character can choose which way to read the d100 result. For example, a roll of 90 could be read as 09. Note: if 

double digits, such as 00, 11, 22, and so forth, are rolled, the result cannot be reinterpreted. 

Mghty The character’s Damage Modifier is recalculated, based on the sum of STR, SIZ and POW. 

Onacle The recipient is capable of appraising, with reasonable accuracy, the likely fate of someone he meets. He does not gain a detailed view of the future, 

but gains a general impression as to whether the individual will be prosperous, lead a full life, die peacefully, and so on. 

Pobyglot The character can understand any language spoken to him — but not read or write it. 

Perfection Raise a characteristic by 1d6 up to the species maximum. 

Resilience The character can endure any pain. He never needs to check Endurance to prevent unconsciousness when wounded, and is immune to torture. 

Resurrect Loved One Aloved one or favoured companion is brought back from death. This Gift can only be applied to each individual once. 

The character is gifted a special residence that is always safe from the cult’s enemies. This residence is usually no larger than a villa, and can take 

Sanctuary many forms (a tower, a small cave complex, and so on). Enemies of the cult — but not necessarily of the character — cannot pass the sanctuary’s 

threshold. 

Reincarnation If killed then the character’s soul is reborn in the body of a suitable creature 1d6 days after death. 

Resurrection If killed then the character rises from the dead 1d6 days after death, their body completely healed of any and all damage done to it. 

Robust The character’s Hit Points are recalculated, based on the sum of CON, SIZ and POW. 

Sagacity Raise one cult skill to 100%. 

Sense Parallels Aware of weaknesses in the fabric of reality. Can spot gates and portals to other planes of existence on a successful Perception roll. 

Some cults have a specific creature from the Creatures chapter that can be summoned, acting much like a familiar. This gift allows one creature of 

Summon the particular type mentioned to be summoned once per adventure. The creature performs one specific action, as directed by the character, and then 

departs. 

Swiftness The character gains one additional Combat Action. 

The character is gifted a weapon of the cult. The weapon is always of a special nature, be it magical (having enhanced damage, or enhancing a 

Weapon Combat Style), unbreakable, or having a particular effect against certain cult enemies. Games Masters will need to define the details. 

Wellspring Magic Points are regenerated at twice the usual rate. 

Youth Return to a young body, reversing all ageing effects. 

202



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

what is occurring. The oath itself does not accord any special pow- 
ers or provide access to magic. What it does is bind the swearer to OAaTtHhSs bBeEyYoOnNdD MEeMmBEbeRrSsHhIiPp 
the brethren, and is viewed as a deep and sacrosanct commitment. Oaths need not— and indeed should not — be confined to joining Cults 

Throughout history and across all types of societies, oaths are taken and Brotherhoods. Oaths can be sworn to lords, masters, and even other 

very seriously: breaking such an oath is an extremely serious matter. characters. The rules work in exactly the same way, and represent the 

New members swear their oath when joining the cult or brother- same thing. Remember though that Oaths are a very big, very serious 

hood. Details vary, but at the very least an oath encompasses: undertaking. Being Oath-Bound represents an obligation to the holder of 
the Oath. 1t comes with responsibilities and consequences. 1t binds fwo 

& Loyalty to the organisation people together. An Oath can over-ride casual responsibilities, friendships 
& Loyalty to its membership and relationships. A character may loathe her queen, for example: but she 
& A promise to abide by its rules 15 Oath-Bound to serve and protect her. 
& A promise to uphold it values A character can only be absolvedfrom an Oath if the Oath-Holder 
& A promise to protect its ideals decides to relieve the obligation. This is dependent on many circumstances 
& A promise to act in the group’s best interests — putting them but absolving an Oath tends to happen when: 

before personal ones 
& A promise to keep the cult or brotherhood’s secrets safe &K A particular obligation or debt has been fulfilled. 

& Circumstances are such that absolving the Oath is the best way 
Tailing in any one of these commitments results in a breaking of Jorward. 

the oath. Obviously some situations occur where there is no option &K The Oath-Holder’s trust in the Qath or the Oath-Bound has 
and, if the oath-breaker can prove to his peers that not breaking the dimanished to such a point that the Oath 15 now meaningless. 
oath would have resulted in much greater misfortune or detriment & The Oath-Holder dies (although remember that some Qaths are 
for the group, then his position may be viewed with leniency. sworn to a position rather than an individual: the hated queen’s 

Oaths are a type of Passion, and calculated as described on page passing does not absolve her servants’ oaths to the crown). 
22 of the Culture and Community chapter: 30% plus the character’s 
POW+INT. Generally the Oath-Bound cannotf orce the absolution of an Oath. They 

The oath is used in the following circumstances: might suggest it if the conditions are appropreate, but the accepted convention 
us that an Oath remains in force until its holder decides to absolve it. 

TouGgHh CHhOoIiCcEeSs - 4 
If a character is forced into a choice that would mean breaking 

his Oath, he must make two rolls: one for his Oath, and one for his with their Captain, can compare Oath values. The higher Oath 

Willpower. If his Oath roll wins the contest then the character abides value is more likely to gain favour or sway opinion than the lower. 

by his oath — taking whatever consequences come with it. If his Will- People who take their oaths seriously, and are committed to them 

power prevails then he has summoned the reserves necessary to have a natural way of reflecting their commitment through body 

break his Oath, and must similarly deal with whatever repercussions language, emotional signals, and so forth. 

that might have — if the organisation discovers the transgression. It is not necessary for a character to have an Oath score of a 

If Willpower beats Oath in this way, the value of the Oath is particular value to advance in rank. Oaths are held personally, and it 

reduced by 1d4+1%: if a character finds he can ignore his Oath is perfectly possible for someone with a shallow belief in their Oath 

once, ignoring it in the future is likely to become easier. to advance much further in the organisation than someone who is 
deeply committed. Indeed, those traitors and potential Oath-break- 

PRrOoVvIinNgG InNtTeEgGRrIitTyY ers driven by ambition might reasonably gain positions of high trust 

If a character finds himself in a situation where he needs to in their cult or brotherhood. 

prove his integrity, he can use his Oath in one of the following ways: 

& To augment his Influence (or skill appropriate to the circum- ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
stances) thereby gaining a bonus. The Cult of Myceras has several oaths, taboos and superstitions which 

& To use his Oath directly to prove his integrity beyond doubt: unite tts members. To join the cult Anathaym must swear an oath to protect 
As a sworn member of the Guild of Merchant Sailors, you the city of Meeros with her life, and never betray the temple, its priests or her 
have my word that we shall carry your cargo safely...’ brother worshippers. 

In additoon cult members are forbidden the _following: to leave the battle- 
The Oath can be opposed by Willpower, Insight or another, 

Jeeld with their backs to an enemy; to go to war or fight whilst rain fallsfrom 
appropriate skill depending on the circumstances. Much depends 

the sky; and to eat the flesh of a bull without casting its heart and loins on a 
of course on how that particular organisation is viewed by those the 

e in offering to the godf urst. 
character is interacting with. 

As a lay member she also learns of the superstitions which her brethren 

GRrOoUuPp StTaAnNDdIinNgG stridently believe in, these being: never pass a bull without praising the strength 
of Myceras, else suffer ill fortune; warriors should wear a helm crested with 

The value of the Oath is unconsciously reflected in a character’s 
bull tarl brastles, which grants the wearer tenacity; and, just as a bull urinates 

conduct and carriage when dealing with his peers. In this way the 
value of the Oath can be used comparatively to distinguish between before charging, a warrior should do the same before baitle. 

members of the same cult or brotherhood. Two mercenaries, for 
example, equally skilled and loyal but vying for a position of trust 

203



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

SUuPpEeRrSsTtIitTiIoOnNSs TaAbBoOOoSs 
Just about every culture is superstitious, but religions and profes- Taboos are things that are not done, both as a matter of cult tradi- 

sions usually have their own peculiar beliefs. Superstitions take many tion and as a way of avoiding bad fortune. Usually breaking a taboo 
forms, and are usually associated with avoiding bad luck (rather than is considered as bringing bad fortune on the whole cult or commu- 
encouraging good luck). These simple acts prevent one from becom- nity, and not just oneself. Some typical taboos are: 
ing prematurely noticed by fate, or the supernatural being which 

& Arson 
overlooks or haunts that particular organisation. A few examples of 

& Cowardice 
typical cult superstitions are as follows: 

& Defiling an artefact of the cult 
&K Never bidf arewell on a bridge (if you want to see the other person alive & Fating human flesh 

again). & Heterosexuality 
& Seeing a single crow is very unlucky; seeing a single hooded crow signals & Homosexuality 

war 1s close by. & Killing animals sacred to the cult 
& Placing on a corselet before ailaching your greaves will bring death very « Killing innocents 

close. « Looting 
X Burning beef bones when making broth brings a bad harvest and poor & Lying 

hunting & Making independent peace with a blood feud enemy 
& Malice and envy are o be feared when sparks jump out of thef ire. & Marrying 
K If thirteen people sit down to dine, the last to rise will meet with ill & Murdering outside of a blood feud 

Jortune. & Necrophilia 
&K If a bad omen is observed, spit to avoid bad luck, and touch a piece of & Pacdophilia 

iron. & Rape 
& Speaking to a member of a different species or opposite sex 

In developing a cult or brotherhood, consider what superstitions « Theft within the cult 
will be associated with it. Some might be hidden wisdom whilst 

& Torture 
others can be odd quirks. Bear in mind the nature of the cult, and 

& Treachery to the cult 
the nature of the society or culture of its members. Primitive cults 

& Worshipping false/foreign gods (indeed, worshipping any 
are likely to be more superstitious than civilised ones, but that is by 

gods) 
no means a hard and fast rule. All cults maintain distinct peculiar- 
ities that most, if not all, members will Breaking a taboo usually involves a punishment — a trial or quest, 
observe. for instance but also by the accepting of a Geas (see below). Punish- 

It is up to the Games Master to ments can run the full gamut: ostracism to torture to execution. The 
decide whether bad luck will actu- severity of the punishment reflects the depth of the taboo, and how 
ally occur if the character ignores it reflects on the cult, the society and its members. 
a superstition. This can take effect 
by the application of unexplained GEeAaSsaA 
skill penalties at odd moments, 

A geas is an obligation which is often used as a curse or a method 
or strange twists of 

of imparting heroic power. If a cult or brotherhood member under 
fate causing events to 

a geas violates their taboo, the infractor will suffer dishonour or even 
backfire against the 

death. On the other hand, observing of one’s geas is believed to 
blasé character. 

bring power and good luck. In traditional mythology, a hero’s doom 
comes about due to violation of the geas, either by accident, or by 
having multiple geasa, and then being placed in a position where 
they have no option but to violate one in order to maintain another. 

Generally a cult or brotherhood only possesses geasa which 
reflect the nature and purpose of the organisation. These are an 
inherent part of the group’s myth and history, explaining its reason 
for being. A character who breaks his geas, whether consciously or 
unwittingly, is deprived of all Luck Points from that moment on. 
Some Games Masters may wish to allow each geas to provide a 
counterbalancing power (see Gifts page 201). This too is lost if the 
geas 1s ever broken. 
A geas can be used to reinforce a social condition, such as a vow 

of chastity or being forbidden to eat meat on festival days. It may 
also be more perilous, compelling the cultist to act in a way con- 
trary to clan or individual norms in order to atone for some previous 

204



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

crime. It is up to the Games Master to decide how geasa are used in ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
his setting, if at all. Sample geasa include: In a rash moment of anger Anathaym strikes her rival, Xenos, when he 

makes an inappropriate remark about her sister. She breaks Xenos® nose, but 
& Never use a sword in battle 

unfortunately does so in view of several cult Elders. As Xenos is also a lay 
& Take a vow of permanent silence 

member of Myceras the Elders deem Anathaym’s infraction serious enough 
& Accept no healing from wounds inflicted in battle lo earn her a geas (Xenos, of course, has embellished his side of the story 
& Wear no armour shamelessly, casting lamself as the victim of an unprovoked assault). She is 
& Drink no alcohol ordered to venture into the baleful Forests of Sykes, in search of the lost Crown 

& Take a permanent vow of chastity of Meera, the first Queen of Meeros. The crown 15 said to be magical, and 

& Become a direct slave of the chief or an elder @5 one of the Lost Treasures of Meeros. If she survwes the task and succeeds 
then her geas will be lifled, and she may even befeted by her cult. If shef ails, 

& Accept exile from the clan, and make no attempt to join 
she s unlikely to survive. As she leaves the Temple of Myceras she sees the 

another 
smarking Xenos, and decides that she will succeed in her geas at any cost, and 

& Quest into enemy lands and kill X enemies extract a_far more subtle revenge on the arrogant nobleman. 
& Live outdoors permanently, never accepting shelter 

& Fat no meat — offer all meat given to the ancestors or clan 
you wish, but assemble some notes on what ceremonies usu- 

chief 
ally require, using myths, history, and other elements to deter- 

& Fat no vegetables - offer all vegetables given to the ancestors 
mine what they consist of. 

or clan chief & Where is the organisation’s home? This might be obvious, if 
& Never utter a single lie the group is local to a small community, but large organisa- 
& Seek-out and start a blood feud tions generally have a base of focus, where the major temple, 

& Journey to holy place, and remain there in the god’s sight for guild house or secretive retreat is located. 

nine days and nights & What happens to those who stray from the cult or brother- 
hood’s path, betray its ideals or attempt to leave? Are magical 
or secular punishments enforced? What is the greatest conse- 
quence which can occur — exile, death or killing of the trans- 

OTtHhEeRr ASsPpEeCcTtSs gressor’s entire family? Is there no sanction at all? Consider 
the organisation’s nature, and outline the punishments, if any, 

The Cults and Brotherhoods described in this chapter are very 
for going against its ideals. 

rudimentary. Games Masters will need to develop their own details 
& What gifts, if any, are offered to the highest members of the 

depending on their MYTHRAS campaign setting. MYTHRAS supple- 
organisation? Look at the nature and role of the organisation, 

ments will no doubt offer fully detailed cults for use in games. Often 
and select gifts accordingly. Will members of brotherhoods 

the fine detail of a cult is not necessary — to begin with characters 
gain supernatural gifts in the form of items? Will the organi- 

simply need to know the bare bones, so below are some general tips 
sation have access to more than one type of gift? Look at the 

on providing a little more cult development. 
list on page 202 to help you decide what should be specific to 

& Organisations usually reflect a real-world need: a profession, the group you’re developing, 

a way of life, a philosophy. Look to fill these gaps. 
& Not all organisations are large. Many are local cults or broth- 

For further guidance on rounding out organisations, see Cults 
erhoods revering a local nature spirit, a small, forgotten god 

and Brotherhoods in the Campaign on page 290. 
or a hero known in a particular region. 

& Organisations provide meaning. Meaning is usually con- 
veyed through myths, codes, rituals and taboos. Spend some 
time thinking about these facets as part of developing a cult. CuulLltT aAnNDd 
Remember that each one explains things in its own ways. 
There is no single truth. BRroOTthHeErRhHoOoOdD CEeNnTtRrEeSs 

& Organisations celebrate ceremonial and holy days. At least Most organisations have a base of some form. This might be 
one day will mark the founding of the cult or brotherhood, as simple as a sacred clearing in an ancient forest where the spir- 
and one will mark another major point of importance, its are most accessible, a remote mountain fortress where a military 
reflecting a key myth or deed (such as the martyrdom of a regiment retires after the campaign season, or something far more 
prophet or the greatest victory of a hero). Decide where in elaborate such as a grand temple built at the heart of a city. Depend- 
your game calendar these official celebrations will appear and ing on their size and spread of their membership, Cults and Broth- 
their importance to members of different ranks. erhoods may have many properties or holy sites distributed across 

& What are the ceremonies for the organisation? Are they for- the world; although only one of these is considered the heart of the 
mal and highly ritualised such as a ritual offering at a temple organisation. 
or are they loosely structured and simple in approach, like The nature of these cult centres is related to the organisation to 
a street party hosted by a guild? Do different celebrations which it belongs, taking almost any form and appearance the Games 
require different ceremonies? Be as vague or as detailed as Master can imagine. Temples, shrines, groves, monasteries, guild 

205



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA MOoNAnSaTsEtRerIiEeSs AanNDd ScChHOoOoLlSs 
The cult of Myceras_focuses on the rushingflow of the battlefield, inner 

Sorcery and Mystical Orders tend to have monasteries or schools 
strength and the purtfying light of the sun. Anathaym must choose which of 

instead of temples (although the faculty might also provide a shrine 
these aspects of Myceras she willf ollow. She decides on motion since herf ocus 

as part of their facilities). The emphasis is more on study and con- 
up tll now has been her athletic fitness, prowess with weapons, and knowl- 

templation than on worship. Protection, at least in the case of sor- 
edge of lactics and strategy. As a Lay Member she is permitted to display 

cery orders, is provided by their diverse range of enchanted spells. 
Myceras’s holy symbol of movement openly, and so has it inscrebed on the 

Otherwise monasteries and schools have quite similar composi- 
breastplate of her armowr. She wants to have the glyph painted on her shield, 

tions to temples: use the Temple table provided earlier to determine 
but this tradition is reserved only for those who have performed certain services 

the composition of the educational facility, but use triple the number 
on behalf of the god, and so she must wait. 

of staff. All monasteries and schools offer training facilities, libraries, 
extensive dormitories and even infirmaries. Stabling will depend on 
the building’s location. 

houses, palaces, labyrinths, sanctuaries, fortresses, libraries, bastions, 
Rather than drawing large numbers of worshippers on particular 

necropolises, schools... the list is endless, as are the locations they 
holy days, monasteries and schools will have a number of Common 

can be found in. Not all such centres are buildings or static loca- 
Members, equal to five times the number of officers in residence, 

tions. Some can be wandering or mobile places such as floating sky- 
who act as servants, pilgrims, students, and so on. 

cities, drifting raft temples or even the insides of gargantuan, living 
creatures. 

Since there are so many permutations some rough guidelines are 
provided to describing the staffing and membership of these places. SaAmMPpLlEe ORrGgAaNnISisAaTtIioONnSs 
Games Masters are encouraged to add further detail about the The following are more fully detailed examples of some cults. 
organisational structure and additional facilities. Games Masters can use them as they are, changing names as 

needed, or more appropriately, use them as a guide for purpose-de- 

TEeMmPpLlEeSs veloped organisations in their own games. Each follows the same 

Temples are sacred places dedicated to one or more demons, structure which can be used as a template for developing bespoke 

gods or even spirits. A temple might have several smaller shrines cults or brotherhoods. 

within its confines, dedicated to other entities of the same pantheon 
NAaMmEe 

or different aspects of the same being. Temples vary in size but usu- 
The name and, sometimes, names, by which the organisation is 

ally have a retinue of staff responsible for the temple’s upkeep, and 
known. 

attending to the needs of the faithful — as well as presiding over the 
ceremonies conducted there. MYyTtHhOoSs aAnNDd HIiSstToORrYy 

Every temple is considered sacrosanct, and is protected by spells 
How the organisation came to be. 

of the appropriate magical discipline which are maintained by the 
higher ranked members. Theist temples, for instance, are protected NAaTtUuRrEe 
with Consecrate spells since they are important for the regaining of What the organisation represents; its place in society, and what it 
Theist miracles, and this holy ground helps establish the relation- seeks to achieve. Also listed here is how the organisation views, and 
ship with the god necessary for magical energy to be channelled treats apostate members. 
and replenished. They can also be places of healing, training, and 
sanctuary. The table below can be used to quickly determine the sta- ORrGgAaNnIiSsAaTtIioOnN 
tus, composition and facilities of a temple if one is needed in hurry. The organisation’s administration, distribution, celebrations or 

If needing a temple dedicated to the worship of spirits, perhaps holy days, important sites, and so on. 
venerating dead ancestors or infamous heroes, then simply exchange 
rank titles and magical skills with those of practicing animists. MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp 

The membership requirements for the organisation. If listed as 

SHhRrIinNEeSs Standard, then the default rank Requirements, Duties and Privileges 
as detailed on page 195 onwards of this chapter are used. 

Shrines are not nearly as organised as temples. They tend to be 
found near to places closely associated with the object of venera- REeSsTtRrIicCTtiIoOnNSs 
tion, and so can be found for both Theist and Animist traditions. The oaths, superstitions, and taboos of the organisation, where 
Most shrines have somewhere suited to either meditation or con- applicable, are detailed here. 
templation but are unsuited to large ceremonies that must be held 
outdoors (if the shrine is, indeed, large enough to be considered a SKkiiLlLls 
building). Shrines, if Theist, are protected by Consecrate spells, and Skills held important by the organisation, which it both teaches, 
Animist shrines are likely to be protected by a patron spirit. Only and form part of its rank requirements. The skills essential for cult 
larger shrines have a permanent custodian. Most lack anything but membership are listed in italics. Any skills that are taught as an extra 
the most basic facilities. benefit are listed in normal type. 

206



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

TemprpLlEe FAaCcIiLlIiTtIieESs 

Minor Temple Modest Temple Major Temple 

Usual Staff 1d3+3 1d6+9 2d6+12 

1d6+6 x Initiates: Devotion (Deity), Exhort 

1d3 x Initiates: Devotion (Deity), Exhort (Deity), 1d4+4 x Initiates: Devotion (Deity), Exhort (Deity), and three other cult skills at 50+1d10% 

and three other cult skills at 50+1d10% (Deity), and three other cult skills at 50+1d10% 1d4+3 x Acolytes: As Initiates but with 

1d2 x Acolytes: As Initiates but with Devotion 1d3+2 x Acolytes: As Initiates but with Devotion Devotion (Deity), Exhort (Deity), and two other 

Cult Rank and Cult (Deity), Exhort (Deity), and two other cult skills (Deity), Exhort (Deity), and two other cult skills cult skills at 70+1d10% 

Skill Levels at 70+1d10% at 70+1d10% 1d3+1 x Priests: As Acolytes but with Devotion 

1 x Priest: As Acolytes but with Devotion 1d2 x Priests: As Acolytes but with Devotion (Deity), Exhort (Deity), and one other cult skill 

(Deity), Exhort (Deity), and one other cult skill (Deity), Exhort (Deity), and one other cult skill at at 90+1d10% 

at 90+1d10% 90+1d10% 1 x High Priest: As Priests but with Devotion 

(Deity), Exhort (Deity) at 110+1d10% 

Shrines 1d3 1d3+1 1d6+2 

Training Facilities? Yes Yes Yes 

50% chance, but small (10+1d20 scrolls or 
Library Yes, medium (50+2d20 scrolls or books) Yes, large (100+2d100 scrolls or books) 

books) 

Lodgings No Yes — 2d3 beds Yes — 1d6+15 beds 

Stables Yes — 1d4 mounts or livestock Yes — 1d6+6 mounts or livestock Yes — 2d6+12 mounts or livestock 

SHhRrIinNEe FAaCcIiLlIiTtIieESs 

Minor Shrine Modest Shrine Major Shrine 

Usual Staff Oorl 1d3+1 

1d3 x Acolytes: As Initiates but with Devotion (Deity), 

Exhort (Deity), and two other cult skills at 70+1d10% 

1 x Priest: As Acolytes but with Devotion (Deity), 

Acolyte: Devotion (Deity), Exhort (Deity), and two Exhort (Deity), and one other cult skill at 90+1d10% 
Cult Rank and 

None other cult skills at 70+1d10%Shaman: Binding, OR 
Cult Skill Levels 

Trance, and two other cult skills at 70+1d10% 1d3 x Shaman: Binding, Trance, and two other cult 

skills at 70+1d10%]1 x High Shaman: As Shamans 

but with Binding, Trance, and one other cult skill at 

90+1d10% 

Small building or medium sized sacred area Medium sized building, or large sacred area (including 
Shrines Simple marker or sacred object 

(glade, stone circle, etc) a medicine lodge, stone circle temple, death house, etc 

Training Facilities? No No Yes 

Library No No 1d3 sheltered areas for sleeping 

Lodgings No Yes — 1d3 beds Yes — 1d3+3 beds 

Stables No No Yes — 1d3 mounts or livestock 

MAaGgIiCc ALlLlIiEeSs AanNDd ENnEeMmIiEeSs 
Specific to cults, this lists the magical disciplines and those spells, If an organisation has any specific alliances (or antipathies) with 

miracles, spirits and talents available to the organisation. another cult or brotherhood, they will be listed here, along with any 
specific benefits and hindrances these bring. 

GiiFfrts 
Gifts offered to the organisation’s members (usually only those 

of high rank). 

207



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

ANnCcEeSsTtoORr WOoRrSsHhIiPp SKkiiLlLls 
Binding, Dance, Insight, Lore (Ancestors), Perception, Sing, 

(AAnNMimiissTt CuuLlTt)) Trance. 

MYyTtHhOoSs AanNDd HIiSstToORrYy Maacgiic 
When those dear to the tribe leave this world they go to the Great Animism: can summon Ancestor spirits, Guardian spirits, and 

Spirit Caves where all the ancestors live and have lived, right back when necessary create Haunts. Shaman of the cult are allowed to 

to the time of the first men who made the tribe. Here the ancestors take a fetch. 

hunt, weave, and feast, never go hungry, defeat all their enemies, 
GIiFfTtSs 

and watch over the Land of the Living and the great tribe, offering 
High Shamans gain the Gift of Abstinence. They can do without 

their wisdom and protection. To enter the Great Spirit Caves is an 
one of the necessities all others need for survival. 

honour, and those who venerate the ancestors and heed their omens 
are guaranteed a place at the fire, a spear in the Great Hunt, and ALlLlIiEeSs AanNDd ENnEeMmIiEeSs 
fine cuts of meat from the kill. 

None. 

NAaTtUuRrEe 
The Ancestors are spirits of wisdom, hunting, weaving, and sur- DeeRrVvIiSshHEeSs oOFf tThHEe OPpEeNn 

vival. They continue in death as they did in life but are free from 
suffering, injury and disease. Through the ancestors the animal spir- SaAnNDds (MMyyssTtiicissmm Cuutlrt)) 
its can also be called and summoned by the shamans because the 
Ancestors are the masters of all animal spirits. The Ancestors pro- MYyTtHhOoSs aAnNDd HIiSstToORrYy 
vide guidance through omens, signs and portents. Their wisdom is in According to oral tradition, the Dervishes of the Open Sands 

the trees, the streams, the animals, the birds and the heavens. When have always haunted the deserts. Nobody remembers who the first 

the moon blocks the sun, that is the Ancestor’s sign for impending mystic was, nor does it matter to them. The sands are always open to 

war. When the locusts come that is the Ancestors’ sign for famine. those who wish to locate the truths behind reality, by suffering their 

The Ancestors speak through nature and greatest of all the Ances- heat, blindness, and scouring winds. 

tors are Grandfather and Grandmother who gave life to the tribe, Why the cult exists is unknown. Its purpose is is equally obscure. 

and taught it its ways: how to hunt; how to make fire; how to birth Those that cannot endure their loss, despair or self disgust, and who 

children, and how to weave. wander into the deserts will always find a path to their acceptant 
salvation from the Dervishes. 

ORrGgAaNnIiSsAaTtIioOnN 
The shamans of the tribe speak directly with the Ancestors, and NAaTtUuRrEe 

call upon the animal spirits through them. Grandfather’s Day is the The dervishes embrace the concepts of freedom, masochism, 

shortest day of the year, and Grandmother’s the longest. There are and physical self mastery. They exist only in the dry hot places of 

many holy places, such as the lightning tree on the lonely hill, and the world, unconsciously drawn to the punishing environment which 

the plunge-pool at the base of the waterfall. Here the Ancestors acts as a path to burn away their mortal sorrows and guilt, purifying 

can be heard most clearly by the shaman, although they can also the soul so that higher truths can be comprehended. 

be heard when the shaman make their great circle of ashes, and Find a lone dervish, and he will be a paragon of kindliness and 

perform the Parents’ Dance or the Hunting Dance. As the shamans hospitality, sharing what few possessions he has. But gather them 

speak with the Ancestors, so they are held holy: without them, the together, and they become a force for destructive chastisement. 

Ancestors will speak only through the signs and omens, and the ani- Their numbers never congregate save when they storm out of their 

mal spirits will not come. desert sanctuaries to perform an act of historical significance; oblit- 
erating those who stray from the path of virtue and right-thinking. 

MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp 
Standard. All males and females reaching the age of twelve ini- ORrGgAaNnIiSsAaTtIioOnN 

tiate into the cult. Males must spend three days and three nights in The Dervishes of the Open Sands have no formal organisation. 

the wilds, and survive, whilst the hunters hunt them. If caught, they They simply wander the deserts, alone, leading a life of extreme 

must spend the next year living as a female before they can attempt asceticism. Most of their time is spent gazing at the sun in deep 

the Hunt again, and so become men. meditation, purifying their soul with its burning light. Soon they 
become blind which releases them from distraction so that they can 

REeSsTtRrIicCTtiIoOnNSs truly perceive the world about them. Much of their time is spent 
in dance, which aids them to think at a higher level. Those who 

& When the moon obscures the sun, war is coming, achieve enlightenment often dance their way across the sands when 
& Killing an enemy when one becomes a Man shows greatness they travel. 

and purpose to the Ancestors. Since their fundamental philosophy is based on freedom of 
& Never kill a shaman; to do so is to be denied a place in the movement, the dervishes build no shrines or temples. The entire 

Great Spirit Caves and to bring doom to the tribe. desert is their sanctuary, whose tribulations are the scourge that frees 
their mind from their body. When someone enters their realm (mis- 
takenly or not), they are often found by a dervish a short while before 

208



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

death. The dervish will adopt the dying man as an aspirant if they on his bones, and his innards fell through his bowels, but he contin- 
feel that person is ready to undertake the journey of self discovery. ued in un-life, and continues still, high in the towers of the Black 
However, since all dervishes adopt the penance of silence it requires Tortress, served by his unloving army, and commanding all the crea- 
some effort on the supplicant’s part to comprehend what the dervish tures of the night. 
is offering them. 

Often a dervish will pass on their adopted aspirant to a mystic of NAaTtUuRrEe 
higher insight, so that he may learn a few more steps on the dervish Those sorcerers who would also command the undead and 

path to wisdom. Although no formal hierarchy is acknowledged, become un-living, like Arunis-Mort, join the order of the Lich Way, 

cult rank is used to demonstrate a level of enlightenment, and more and study the Invocations penned by Arunis-Sul. This is a cult of 

respect is given by cult members to a mystic of higher achievement. necromancers and death-cheaters; those who seek to prolong their 

The cult celebrates no particular holy days as such trivialities are existence beyond its physical limits, and to control the very nature of 

beneath consideration. death itself. The cult is hated because it takes the recently dead and 
makes slaves of them: zombies and skeletal servants. Its adherents 

 MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp commune with vampires and demons, practice foul rites including 
Standard. Only those who deliberately seck their death in the human sacrifice, and prey upon the innocent and unwitting. The 

desert, or lone travellers who accidentally stray into its wilder cult’s nature is corruption, and Arunis-Mort continues to rule over 
regions, are approached by a dervish and given the chance to live. his own creation as the Lich Lord supreme. 
This is as prosaic as following the dervish to the nearest source of 
food or water, which the dervish himself may not need. There are ORrGgAaNnIiSsAaTtIioOnN 
no age or race limits to those adopted into the cult, only the will to Arunis-Mort controls the cult from the Black Fortress. This 

learn the obscure habits and practices of their guardian. To achieve immense edifice of basalt and bone contains his army of the un-liv- 

the rank of Student and above, the mystic must render themselves ing, and many vile fiends from the depths of hell. The Lich Lord is 

blind by staring at the sun. the ultimate arch mage but the other high ranking members of the 
cult, the Mages and Champions, serve him directly and go forth to 

REeSsTtRrIicCTtiIoOnNSs do his bidding, and train the adepts of the cult. In time Arunis-Mort 
There are few formalised restrictions save that cult members are intends to create a kingdom of the un-living, and then an empire, 

forbidden to harm one another, personal possessions should be given corrupting all life as it goes. For this reason the order’s members are 
to others more in need of them, and that speaking is forbidden. secretive and solitary, never speaking of their true beliefs. However 

all initiates of the order are required to seek out the Black Fortress 
SKkIiLlLlSs and prostrate themselves before Arunis-Mort. Only then will they 

Dance, Endurance, Evade, Meditation, Mysticism (Dervish of be shown the secrets of the Ways of the Lich and, upon achieving 
the Open Sands), Perception, Survival. Mage status, be taught the Lich Rite so they too will cheat death. 

Maacgiic MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp 
Mysticism: Augment Endurance, Invoke Dark Sight, Invoke Standard. Sorcerers who join the order must pledge secrecy and 

Denial (Food), Invoke Denial (Water), Invoke Indomitable, Invoke discretion. Failure to maintain either results in the miscreant being 
Life Sense, Enhance Fatigue. hunted by one of the six vampire lords Arunis-Mort commands, and 

being made a slave in the Black Fortress for eternity. 
GriFfts 

Gifts are gained according to cult rank. Dervishes who achieve REeSsTtRrIicCtTiIoOnNSs 
the rank of Disciple receive the gift of Robust, those ranked Master See Gifts below. 
receive Invulnerability to Fire/Heat, whilst the few who reach Sage 
receive Oracle. SKkiiLlLls 

Deceit, Invocation (Way of the Lich), Lore (Arunis-Mort), Shap- 
ALlLlIiEeSs aAnNDd ENnEeMmIiEeSs ing, Willpower. 

Dervishes are both disliked and feared by all who live on the 
borders of the deserts. Since the mystics restrict their travels to the MAaGgIiCc 
deepest, most remote areas it is rare that they encounter civilisation. Sorcery: Abjure (Decay), Animate (Bone), Dominate (Undead), 
When they do, dervishes are accorded no civility or service: in fact if Enchant, Sculpt (Corpse), Revivify, Sense (Death), Undeath. 
the mystic appears vulnerable they will be actively persecuted. 

GiiFfts 
ThHEe LicchH WAaYy (SSoORrccCery Cuurlrt)) Upon reaching the rank of Adept, sorcerers of the cult are 

brought to the Black lortress and permitted to take one of the fol- 

MYyTtHhOoSs AanNDd HIiSstToORrYy lowing gifts: Eternal Life, Invulnerability, and Mighty, but only in 
exchange for being cursed with a dire Geas worded to support Aru- 

Arunis-Sul discovered the spells that master death, and created 
nis-Mort or complete one of his myriad plans. With each increase 

the tome called, in the common tongue, Ways of the Lich. As his 
in rank the sorcerer may take one of the remaining gifts, eventually 

own time in the world came to an end his followers performed the 
turning the sorcerer into an immortal, un-living monstrosity. 

Lich Rite just as Arunis-Sul had formulated it, and so Arunis-Sul did 
not die but became Arunis-Mort, the Lich Lord. The skin withered 

209



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

ALlLlIiEeSs aAnNDd ENnEeMmIiEeSs REeSsTtRrIicCtTiIoOnNSs 
All are enemies of this diabolical cult. None are allies. 

& Never leave the battlefield with your back to an enemy 
& Never go to war or fight whilst rain falls from the sky 

MyycceerAas (ThHEeIiSstT CuuLlTt)) & Never eat the flesh of a bull without casting its heart and loins 
on a fire as an offering to Myceras 

MYyTtHhOoSs AanNDd HIiSstToORrYy 
In the ancient days when men were but children, a great serpent 

came to the land and consumed everything. The children were hun- SKkIiLlLlSs 
gry and scared. Darkness came with the serpent and plunged all into Brawn, Devotion, Endurance, Exhort, Lore (Herding), Unarmed, 

night. Then, one day, as Araxis the First Tender watched his herd Meerish Infantry Combat Style. 

of cows and bulls, one of the bulls spoke to him. ‘Make a sacrifice 
MAaGgIiCc 

to the sun, and all shall be restored.” So Araxis led his finest heifer 
Lay Members with an aptitude for Folk Magic may learn up to 

to the foot of the Great Plateau, and made it an offering. Then the 
three appropriate Folk Magic spells. The cult teaches Bladesharp, 

stars began to fall as spears, their bright tails dismissing the darkness. 
Coordination and Might. Initiates gain access to the skills of The- 

From the heavens was a thunderous bellow, and as Araxis watched 
ism, and can pray for miracles. 

a vast, bull headed giant came down from the sky, its body wreathed 
Miracles offered are Beast Form, Berserk, Clear Skies, Conse- 

in flame. The serpent rose up to challenge the bull god, but as they 
crate, Fortify, Sacred Band, Shield and Sunspear. 

wrestled the bright countenance of Myceras burned the serpent 
and thus defeated, he bound the beast within a tomb imprisoned GiiFfts 
in shackles of eternal fire. With this, the sun returned to the world. 

Those who show true and selfless dedication to the cult, whatever 
Myceras taught the people of the hills how to use the sling, and 

their rank, are gifted with Robust. High Priests are gifted with either 
spear. He taught them the arts of war, and how to raise their herds 

Oracle for those who wish to retire to a life of ascetic contemplation, 
so none would ever be hungry again. He taught them the ways of 

or Summon for more active cult leaders. This latter gift calls forth a 
the beasts, and how to farm them and care for them. Finally he 

divine bull which acts as a bodyguard and mount for the fortunate 
showed them how to make the Army so that the serpent and its 

recipient. Treat as an Aurochs. 
followers could be challenged. So was Myceras born and returned 
to the world. ALlLlIiEeSs AanNDd ENnEeMmIiEeSs 

The Serpent God Yethis is the traditional enemy of Myceras. 
NAaTtUuRrEe 

The cult considers all ophidians as enemies, as well as those who 
Myceras is a diverse cult. He is both the God of War, the God of 

learn sorcery. 
Farmers and Herders, and the protector God of the city of Meeros. 

In addition, cults which fail to show proper subservience to Myc- 
He teaches his followers never to be still and never to be compliant. 

eras are also considered enemies, and by association those cities 
He teaches bravery and fearlessness in the face of the enemy, and 

which dare to host them. 
brings the truth that the herd is the centre of all community. 

His different aspects are represented as a minotaur as the God of 
War, as a pure bull as the God of the Herd, and as a flame-wreathed 
man as the Lord of Light and Fire. ExXAaMmPpLlEe 
ORrGgAaNnIiSsAaTtIioOnN ORrGgAaNnISisAaTtIioONnSs 

The Cult of Myceras is based on a formal priesthood that leads The following tables provide a rough selection of many different 
all ceremonies and rituals. The Great Temple of Myceras is the cen- types of cult or brotherhood which can be easily modified to fit into 
tral place of worship although many smaller temples and shrines a campaign setting. They have not been designed with any sense of 
are found throughout the land, each dedicated to one or two of his game balance, only to illustrate particular themes which should be 
aspects. The sacrifice of cows is common: any pure-white heifer fleshed out as with the previous examples. 
born in a herd is marked as a bride of Myceras, and sacrificed on These cults are useful as off-the-cuff references if an organisation 
the mid-summer eve in the Fesitival of Light which marks Myceras’ is needed in a hurry (to identify likely skills offered for training, and 
return to the world. a subset of likely magic to select from). 

MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp 
Standard. Only warriors are permitted to become lay members 

although this is not compulsory. Initiates and above must abandon 
the pursuit of arms, and be dedicated wholly to Myceras’s service as 
one of his priesthood, a path sometimes taken by retiring soldiers. 

210



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

ANnmimmisisTtiic CuuLlTts 

Cult Name Standard Skills Professional Skills Spirits 

Ancestor Cult Clustoms, Insight, Perception Binding, Lore (Ancestors), Trance Ancestors 

Al Athletics, Evade, Ride Binding, Lore (Animal Spirit), Trance Animal Spirits, Predator Spirits 

Nature Spirit Insight, Locale, Willpower Binding, Lore ¢ (Nature Spirit), Trance Nature Spirits, associated Animal Spirits 

Binding, Lore ( (Healing Spirit), Healing, 
Healing Spirit Endurance, First Aid Healing Spirit, Guardian Spirits 

Trance 

Disease Spirit Influence, Willpower, Endurance Lore (Disease Spirit), Trance Disease Spirits, perhaps Curse Spirits 

BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 
Brotherhood Type Standard Skills Professional Skills 

Alchemical Society Insight, Perception, Willpower Lore (Alchemy), Lore (Minerals) 

Astrological/ Astronomical Fellowship Insight, Perception Lore (Astrology), Lore (Astronomy), Lore (Mathematics) 

College/ University Alumni Ciustoms, Influence, Willpower Lore (Any Two) 

Criminal Fraternity Conceal, Deceit, Endurance Disguise, Sleight 

Masons Endurance, Insight, Locale Craft (Masonry), Engineering 

Mercenary Company Athletics, Evade, Two Combat Styles Lore (Strategy and Tactics) 

Merchant Venturers Influence, Perception Commerce, Navigate, Seamanship 

Midwives First Aid, Influence, Locale Healing, Lore (Midwifery) 

Physicians Tirst Aid, Insight, Locale Healing, Lore (Herbs) 

Political Party or Movements Clustoms or Deceit, Influence, Insight Orate, Lore (Politics) 

Ship’s Company Athletics, Boating, Endurance Navigate, Seamanship 

Thieves’/Assassins’ Guild Conceal, Deceit, Evade, One Combat Style Sleight 

Trade and Craft Guild Clustoms, Perception Commerce, Craft (Appropriate to the Guild) 

Athletics, Brawn, Evade, Endurance, One Combat Style 
Warband Lore (Strategy and Tactics) 

Appropriate to the Band 

MoysTticissmm Cuurlts 

Cult Name Standard Skills Professional Skills Paths 

The Way of All Knowledge Augment Insight, Augment Language, 
Monastic Order of Language (any), Literacy, Lore (any), 

None Augment Lore, Invoke Aura (Wisdom), Invoke Awareness, Invoke Denial 
Epistemology Meditation, Mysticism 

(Ignorance), Invoke Magic Sense 

Path of Healing 

Brotherhood of the Augment Endurance, Augment First Aid, Augment Healing, Invoke Disease 
First Aid, Locale Healing, Meditation, Mysticism 

Healing Hands Immunity, Invoke Poison Immunity, Enhance Healing Rate, Enhance 

Fatigue 

Path of Shadows 

School of Augment Perception, Augment Stealth, Augment Unarmed, Augment 
Perception, Stealth Sleight, Meditation, Mysticism 

Impenetrable Silence Ranged Combat Style, Invoke Adhesion, Invoke Dark Sight, Enhance 

Movement 

Path of Deceit 
Tellowship of the 

Deceit, Influence Oratory, Meditation, Mysticism Augment Conceal, Augment Deceit, Augment Influence, Augment Sleight, 
Snake 

Augment Willpower, Invoke Night Sight, Enhance Movement 

Way of the Tiger 

Augment Athletics, 

Augment Brawn, Augment 

School of the Endurance, Augment 
Athletics, Unarmed Survival, Meditation, Mysticism 

Leaping Tiger Unarmed, Invoke Formidable 

Natural Weapons, Enhance 

Action Points, Enhance 

Damage Modifier 

211



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CUuLlTtSs && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

MyyssTtiicismm Cuutlts (CCoONnTtIinNUuEeDd)) 
Cult Name Standard Skills Professional Skills Paths 

Way of Abjuration 

Augment Endurance, Augment Survival, Invoke Denial (Food), Invoke 
Order of Asceticism Endurance, Willpower Survival, Meditation, Mysticism 

Denial (Water), Invoke Denial (Sleep), Enhance Fatigue, Enhance Hit 

Points 

Way of Reason 

School of Augment Customs, Augment Influence, Augment Insight, Augment 
Customs, Influence Lore (any), Meditation, Mysticism 

Enlightened Being Willpower, Invoke Aura (Authority), Invoke Aura (Wisdom), Enhance 

Initiative 

SoORrCcEeRrYy CUuLlTtSs 

Cult Name Standard Skills Professional Skills Spells 

Lore (Strategy and Tactics), Invocation, Attract Missile, Bypass Armour, Damage Enhancement, Damage 
Military Order Combat Style, Unarmed 

Shaping Resistance, Haste, Protective Ward, Transfer Wound 

Abjure (Decay), Dominate (Undead), Revivify, Spirit Resistance, Transfer 
Necromantic Order Endurance, Willpower Lore (Undead), Invocation, Shaping 

Wound, Trap Soul, Undeath 

Commerce, Lore (Alchemy), Diminish (Characteristic), Enlarge, Holdfast, Neutralise Magic, Sculpt 
Alchemical Order Locale 

Invocation, Shaping (Substance), Shrink, Transmogrify (to Substance) 

Abjure (Process), Intuition, Mystic (Sense), Neutralise Magic, Perceive 
Scholastic Order Insight, Perception Lore (any), Invocation, Shaping 

(Sense), Project (Sense), Sense (Knowledge) 

Abjure (Substance), Banish, Damage Resistance, Mystic (Sense), 
Hermetic Order Perception, Willpower Lore (any), Invocation, Shaping 

Protective Ward, Spirit Resistance, Spell Resistance 

Castback, Enslave (Creatures), Evoke (Entity), Imprison, Smother, Tap 
Dark Forces Order Insight, Stealth Disguise, Invocation, Shaping 

(Characteristic), Wrack 

Communication Tly, Haste, Intuition, Phantom (Sense), Project (Sense), Telepathy, 
Customs, Influence Language (any), Invocation, Shaping 

Order Teleport 

Abjure, Damage Resistance, Neutralise Magic, Palsy, Regenerate, 
Medical Order First Aid, Locale Healing, Invocation, Shaping 

Repulse (Vermin), Transfer Wound 

Dominate (Creatures), Draw (Creatures), Enhance (Characteristic), 
Transmutation Order Endurance, Unarmed Lore (Creatures), Invocation, Shaping 

Haste, Perceive (Sense), Shapechange (to Creature), Switch Body 

THhEeIistT CUuLlTtSs 
Cult Name Standard Skills Professional Skills Miracles 

Berserk, Call Winds, Clear Skies, Cloud Call, Dismiss Elemental, 
Air God: Athletics, Evade 

Air/Storm God Devotion, Exhort, Survival Elemental Summoning (Sylph), Lightning, Rain of Hail, Sacred Band, 
Storm God: Athletics, Brawn 

Shield, Thunderclap 

Backlash, Dismiss Magic, Fortify, Harmonise, Leeching, Mindlink, 
Crafter God Brawn, Endurance Craft (Any), Devotion, Exhort 

Pacify, Perseverance, Steadfast, True (Weapon) 

Aegis, Backlash, Bind Ghost, Corruption, Dismiss Magic, Fear, Heart 
Influence, Willpower, Combat 

Death God Devotion, Exhort Seizure, Lay to Rest, Raise Undead, Sever Spirit, Soul Sight, Spirit 
Style 

Block, True (Weapon) 

Devotion, Exhort, and either Absorption, Backlash, Dismiss Elemental, Earthquake, Elemental 

Earth God Brawn, Locale Engineering or Lore (Mining or Summoning (Gnome), Fortify, Lay to Rest, Propitiate, Rain of Stones, 

Smithing) Sacred Band, Shield, Steadfast 

Craft (Farming or Husbandry), Beast Form, Bless Crops, Clear Skies, Cloud Call, Dismiss Magic, 
Tertility Goddess Endurance, Locale 

Devotion, Exhort Entangle, Enthrall, Fecundity, Growth, Heal Wound, Pacify, Ripen 

Cure Malady, Cure Sense, Dismiss Magic, Exorcism, Fecundity, Heal 

Healing God First Aid, Endurance Devotion, Exhort, Healing Body, Heal Mind, Heal Wound, Lay to Rest, Pacify, Rejuvenate, 

Resurrect 

Beast Form, Chameleon, Cloud Call, Dismiss Magic, Entangle, 

Hunter God Athletics, Stealth Devotion, Exhort, Track Harmonise, Illusion, Lay to Rest, Pacify, Shield, Sureshot, True 

(Weapon) 

Devotion, Exhort, Lore (Character’s Dismiss Magic, Heal Mind, Mindblast, Mindlink, Obliterate, Propitiate, 
Knowledge God Clustoms, Perception 

Choice) Reflection, Soul Sight, Spirit Block, Steadfast 

212



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  CuullTts && BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs 

THheeiistT Cuutlts (CCoONnTtIinNUuEeDd)) 
Cult Name Standard Skills Professional Skills Miracles 

Beast Form, Breathe Water, Call Winds, Dismiss Elemental, Elemental 
Devotion, Exhort, and either Craft 

Sea/Water God Boating, Swim . i Summoning (Undine), Perseverance, Propitiate, Sacred Band, Steadfast, 
(Fishing) or Seamanship 

Thunderclap 

Acgis, Clear Skies, Dismiss Elemental, Elemental Summoning 

Sun God/Fire God Influence, Insight Devotion, Exhort, Oratory (Salamander), Fear, Tllusion, Leeching, Mirage, Rain of Fire, Sacred 

Band, Shield, Sunspear 

Dismiss Magic, Enthrall, Illusion, Mindlink, Pacify, Perseverance, 
Trading God Customs, Insight Commerce, Devotion, Exhort 

Propitiate, Reflection, Soul Sight 

Absorption, Backlash, Beast Form, Chameleon, Corruption, Dismiss 

Trickster God Conceal, Deceit Devotion, Disguise, Exhort Magic, Enthrall, Fear, Harmonise, Illusion, Madness, Mirage, Soul 

Sight 

Acgis, Berserk, Dismiss Magic, Fortify, Perseverance, Reflection, Sacred 
War God Combat Style, Evade, Endurance ~ Devotion, Exhort 

Band, Shield, Steadfast, Sureshot, True (Weapon) 

THhEeIiSstT MIiRrAaCcLlEeSs 
The muracles listedfor each of the generic Theist Culls are merely a broad range of suggestions. from which a cult can select its own unique subset of spe- 

cialist magues (see How Many Abilities?, page 114). The miracles Awaken, Behold, Consecrate, Excommunicate and Extenswon tend to be ubiquitous across 
most cults - although this is not always the case. When choosing muracles offered by a particular type of cult Games Masters should consider including one or 
more of these five miracles as part of those offered in its portfolio; but must take into account the cult's nature when making a decision on which of them would 
be relevant or useful to it. For instance, a War God cult might offer Awaken and Consecrate as part of its maracles, whilst a Trickster cult might instead offer 
Behold, Excommunicate and Extension. 
N - 

213



Mythras:  Creatures

oy X 2 o % o F WKW I K A << A o B B T <= B = Gl 

Creatures

oy X 2 o % o F WKW M K K B A M YU < <G | 

nimals, monsters, and creatures of myth, legend and folk- fixed INT of 6, and an INS of 2d6+6, giving an INS range of 8 to 
lore are the focus of this chapter. The primary use of crea- 18 with an average of 13. Its INT though, as measured in sapient 

A tures is as adversaries, but they should never be thought terms, is only 6. 
of strictly in these terms. Every creature has its own motivations, INS, then, represents instinctive behaviour but also innate cun- 
instincts and drives, just as characters do, and they can be much ning, and other behaviours essential to its nature and survival that 
more than simply sword or arrow fodder. Intelligent, sapient crea- would otherwise be penalized or poorly represented by a straight 
tures in particular may act with similar degrees of intelligence, guile INT score. 
and cunning as any character and, with the right approach, can be When calculating a creature’s Initiative Bonus they use their INS 
developed into characters in their own right — to interact with as instead of INT. 
well as to be treated as opponents or obstacles. This chapter there- 
fore offers guidance for Games Masters on how to make creatures, CRrEeAaTtUuRrEe INNT TAaBbLlEe 

sapient and otherwise, as effective as possible, be this the tactics of 
fi:;;e Creature Types 

pack hunters or how to represent creatures operating on instinct or 
other motivations. 1 Invertebrates (worms, snails, and such) 

Most creatures in MYTHRAS are defined by the same characteris- 2 Insects and Crustaceans 
tics, attributes and skills as player characters. This means that some 3 Amphibians and Fish 
species, sapient or otherwise, can be used as player characters if 

a Reptilian, Avian, and Mammalian herbivores (such as elk or 
Games Masters allow this in their campaign. There are, however, 

triceratops) 
certain differences that help mark creatures and different species, 

Reptilian and Avian carnivores (for example allosaurs or terror 
from standard humans, notably Intelligence and Instinct, and Crea- 

> birds) 
ture Abilities. 

6 Mammalian carnivores (bears, big cats, and the like) 

7 Almost sapient Mammals and Monsters (apes, chimera etc) 

InNtTeElLlLiIgGeEnNcCEe 

AanNDd InNsStTiInNcCtT CRrEeAaTtUuRrEe ABbILilIiTtIiEeSs 
Some creatures do not exhibit intelligence on the same scale or A creature ability is something it can do naturally as a result of its 

in the same way as humans. It is usual, for instance, to judge dogs physiology, biology, innate magic, and so forth. Birds, for example, 

and cats (and most mammals) as being less intelligent than humans can flap through the air, and so Flying is an ability. 

because they appear to have limited reasoning and problem-solving Each of the following abilities is described in terms of its game 

capabilities, and are driven far more by base instinct than a rea- effects, and how it may affect interactions with others: 

soned approach to their environment. Where such creatures are 
ADdHhEeRrIinNgG 

concerned, INT is a fixed value determined by the creature’s gen- 
The creature can move freely on vertical surfaces, and even move 

eral type (see the Creature INT table below), and a new charac- 
upside down on a ceiling with no special equipment. Such Move- 

teristic, Instinct (INS), is used to figure all attributes and skills that 
ment is always at half the creature’s normal Movement rate. 

would otherwise rely on the INT score. Creatures calculate INS on 
2d6+fixed INT. Thus a wolf, being a mammalian carnivore, has a 

214



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

ALlLlEerRgGYy CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIicC DRrAaIinN 

The creature has a powerful allergy or other negative reaction The creature has the innate ability to drain temporary Charac- 
to a specific substance that normally does not inflict damage; such teristic points from the target of their attacks. The type of attack, 
as wine, salt, water, and so on. If the creature is exposed to the sub- the Characteristic affected, and how to resist the draining effect is 
stance it suffers 1d6 damage per Combat Round to those locations in detailed in the creature’s description. 
contact. Worn armour blocks its normal amount of Armour Points 
against this damage, assuming the creature is not fully drenched or CoLlpd-BLloOoODdEedD 
immersed in the substance. Natural protection, however, does not The creature does not need to eat frequently. One meal a week 

count. is sufficient to keep it healthy and well fed, and gorging itself on a 
large amount of meat will remove the need to eat for a month. Con- 

AQqUuAaTtIiCc versely, when exposed to temperatures below 15 degrees Celsius, its 
The creature breathes water rather than air, generally possessing reflexes become muted, suffering a penalty of -6 to Initiative, and 

gills or a skin capable of absorbing dissolved air directly. If taken out the loss of one Combat Action per round. Below 5 degrees Celsius 
of water and their breathing organs allowed to dry out, they begin cold blooded creatures become completely torpid, entering a help- 
to suffocate after their CON in minutes if remaining passive or half less catatonic state. 
that time if moving or fighting. 

CoMmMmUuNnAaLl MIiNnDd 
BLloOoOdD SEenNSsEe Though a single creature of this type has only a low INT] a large 

Allows the creature to detect blood over great distances, either group of them together possess a vastly improved intellect, poten- 
carried by wind or water. Traces of blood can be sensed at a distance tially achieving sapience. 
of half its INS in kilometres. 

DAaRrKk SIigGhHTt 
BRrEeAaTthHEe FlLaAmMEe Allows the creature to see normally in the complete absence of 

The creature breathes flame over an area as a Combat Action. light. 
The flame covers a cone in front of the creature, which stretches 
for its CON in metres. At the furthest extent, the width of the cone DEeAaTthH SEenNSsEe 
is one quarter of the creature’s CON. Any creature caught in the In tune with the powers of death, the creature can sense the 

flame suffers fire-based damage to all hit locations, though a charac- death of living things, and dead flesh at a range of up to half its 

ter can attempt to Evade to halve this damage. Armour Points count INT or INS in kilometres. 

as normal unless otherwise noted. 
DiiseAaSsEe ImMmMUuNnIiTtYy 

A creature can only breathe flame once in a specified time period 
The creature is immune to all diseases. All creatures without SIZ 

(usually once per hour or once per day). Further attempts to breathe 
automatically have this ability, although it is not specifically listed in 

flame within this time require the creature to pass Endurance rolls 
their descriptions. 

with each roll becoming one grade harder, or suffer a level of Fatigue. 

URROWER DiivIinNgG STtRrIikKEe 
Burrower

Some creatures can plummet from the sky or surge through 
The creature is adept at tunnelling through the ground at its 

the waters to attack their prey, striking with incredible force. This 
normal Movement rate. Some creatures are limited in the kind of 

is effectively charging for creatures which are not land based. Div- 
ground they can move through, which is noted in the creature’s 

ing Strike increases both the Size of the attack, and the creature’s 
description. 

Damage Modifier by one step, for this attack only. A diving strike 

CAaMmOoUuFfLlAaGgEeDd may only be used once per round. The creature must be at least 

The creature is adept at hiding due to its colouration or unusual one full round of Movement above its target (or possibly below if 

surface texture. Those attempting to spot the creature suffer a pen- submerged) in order to use the diving strike. 

alty to Perception of two difficulty grades. 
EaARrTthH SEenNSsEe 

CHhAaOoSs AUuRrAa Some creatures are so in tune with the underground world that 

This creature is tainted by Chaos, and other chaotic creatures they can work perfectly well in the total darkness of the deep. By 

can sometimes recognise this. When encountering a creature of sensing vibration and air pressure, a creature with Earth Sense can 

Chaos, it can attempt a Willpower roll. If successful, the creature fight, and make Perception rolls with no penalty as long as their tar- 

will not be attacked by its enemy, so long as it does not take any get is no more than their INS in metres away. If using Earth Sense 

hostile action. above ground the range is halved. 

CHhAaOoSs FeEaAtTuURrEe EchHOoLlOoCcAaTtIioOnN 
Creatures tainted with Chaos do not always obey the normal The creature senses its environment through reflections of sonic 

laws of physical growth, and many are hideously malformed. Each waves. This means that it can perceive others that may be either 

Chaos Feature Trait forces the creature to roll once on the Chaos motionless or hidden. In such circumstances, using a Stealth roll to 

Feature table on pages 275 to 276, applying the effects immediately. attempt to remain unperceived by the creature is two grades more 
difficult. 

215



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

ENnGgUuLlFfIinNgG HoLlpd BRrEeAaTthH 
The creature has an orifice which can swallow targets whole. The The creature can hold its breath for extended periods of time. If 

maximum size of an engulfed victim is figured as half the creature’s prepared and remaining fairly static, the creature can hold its breath 
own SIZ, but may be less than this depending on the creature’s phys- for a number of minutes equal to its CON. This period is halved if 
iology. When engulfed the victim suffers at least one damage roll the creature is active, such as when swimming or fighting. 
based on the creature’s bite attack before being swallowed — the time 
spent chewing depends on the creature, and how sensitive its innards ImMmMUuNnIiTtYy 

are. If still alive a swallowed victim will begin to suffocate, likely The creature is completely immune to damage caused by one 

dying by asphyxiation before suffering any noticeable damage from type of source. This source (cold, fire, iron, etc.) will be noted in the 

stomach acid. Realistically, an engulfed victim lacks the mobility to creature’s listing, but a narrative description may be necessary for 

move inside the digestive tract or the creature is so large that he will some of the more specific immunities. 

die long before he can cut its way out. 
InNtTiImMIidDaATtEe 

FLlyYiInNgG The creature may intimidate opponents as a prelude to combat or 

The creature automatically succeeds in everyday moving and to avoid it altogether: growls, snarls, lowering of horns, and so forth. 

manoeuvring whilst flying, and need not roll their Fly skill unless Opponents must make an unopposed Willpower roll to hold their 

attempting an unusually difficult task, such as flying against a pow- ground; a success allows a character to stand his ground, whereas 

erful wind, evading a ranged attack in the air, or out-manoeuvring a failure indicates that they must spend the next round instinctively 

an aerial foe. A flyer may substitute the Fly skill (base STR+DEX) placing distance between themselves and the creature. If he fumbles 

for Evade whilst fighting whilst aloft. the Willpower roll, then the character flees at maximum speed. A 
critical success allows the character to ignore any further intimida- 

FoORrMmIiDdAaBbLlEe NAaTtUuRrAaLl WEeAaPpOoNnSs tion attempts by the creature or its brethren during that encounter. 
This creature is able to actively parry or deflect attacks using its The effect continues for as long as the creature continues to actin a 

natural weapons. This is due to a combination of fighting style and threatening manner, which includes it making an attack. 
possessing natural armament being formed from resilient substances 
such as horn, chitin or bone which are able to shrug off damage LeEaAPpEerR 
from manufactured weapons. Note that creatures lacking this trait The creature uses Leaping attacks as described on page 104 of 

either rely on their natural armour to turn blows or use Evade. the Combat chapter, but can combine the leap with a physical attack 
such as a claw or bite. If the leaping creature wins the opposed leap 

FrReEnNZzYy attack roll, it automatically inflicts damage for one of its natural 
When wounded or exposed to a particular substance - blood for weapons on the target. This damage cannot be parried except by 

instance - the creature must succeed in a Willpower roll or enter a Passive Blocking. 
frenzy. The frenzy lasts a number of rounds equal to the creature’s 
CON. During the frenzy they must only spend Combat Actions on LifFeE SEenNSsEe 
attacking or moving towards combat. Spellcasting, parrying, evad- In tune with the rhythms of nature, this creature can determine 

ing, and anything else is forbidden; all thoughts of self preservation the vitality of any living creature by touch alone. If the creature 

washed away in a red haze. In return, the creature no longer suffers makes a successful Perception roll, it learns of the target’s current 

pain or fatigue, and is impervious to mental control. During this injuries, Fatigue level, and whether it is currently afflicted by any 

time it is immune to all the detrimental effects of Serious Wounds, poison or disease. The creature is also aware of any form of life 

although a Major Wound will still incapacitate. If still alive, once within a number of metres equal to its Willpower skill, which may 

the frenzy finishes the creature automatically gains a fatigue level make Stealth difficult to accomplish. 

of Exhausted. 
MaaAGgiic SEenNSsEe 

GAaZzEe ATtTtaAcCkK Similar to Life Sense but permits the creature to detect magical 

The creature has a gaze attack. This attack may be active (the emanations over the same distances. If the creature touches another 

creature must consciously spend an Action Point on its turn to use and makes a successful Perception roll, it learns of the target’s cur- 

it on a foe) or passive (anyone looking at the creature is affected), as rent magic points, carried enchantments, and active spells. 

listed in the creature’s description. 
Muurlttii-HHEeaAdDEedD 

GRrAaPpPpLlEerR The creature gains an additional Combat Action per extra head 

If the creature successfully strikes in combat, it can immediately possessed beyond the first. These are lost as each individual head 

Grapple in addition to inflicting damage. If the creature’s attack is incapacitated or severed. Provided one head remains active, the 

was parried (or the creature itself is parrying), then the creature creature can still control its shared body. When a multi-headed crea- 

is granted the Grip effect against the opponent’s limb or the Pin ture resists spells which affect emotions or intellect, it rolls individual 

Weapon effect against his weapon instead. The creature always uses saves for each still intact head. 

its Brawn skill to resist a victim from breaking free. 
Muuttltii-LimmbsedD 

Similar to Multi-headed, the creature gains an additional Com- 
bat Action per extra pair of limbs (beyond the first) it can bring to 
bear during combat — those normally used to hold up or move the 

216



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

creature do not count. These extra Combat Actions can only be control, though it does not have access to any of the memories, skills 
used to perform actions with those specific limbs, and are lost as or magic of the possessed. 
cach pair are immobilised or incapacitated. 

REeGgEeNnEeRrAaTtIioOnN 
NIigGhHTt SiIgGhHTt The creature is able to regenerate Hit Points lost to damage. The 

Allows the creature to treat partial darkness as illuminated and speed of regeneration varies depending upon the creature. Unless 
darkness as partial darkness. specifically noted, regeneration does not replace lost limbs, and the 

severing of a vital location (head, chest or abdomen) will still result 
PoiisoonN ImMmMUuNnIiTtYy in death 

The creature is immune to all poisons. All creatures without SIZ 
automatically have this Trait, although it is not specifically listed in SwWIimMmMEeRr 
their descriptions. The creature automatically succeeds in everyday moving and 

manocuvring whilst swimming, and need not roll their Swim skill 
PossseessssioNn,, COoVvEeRrTt unless attempting an unusually difficult task, such as swimming 
A more insidious means of possession, covert possession means, against a powerful tide or leaping up a waterfall. A swimmer may 

essentially, that the creature’s mind or spirit is a hitchhiker in the substitute the Swim skill for Athletics and Evade rolls whilst in water. 
body of the possessed victim. It exhibits no control over the body 
whist the victim is conscious, leaving the host completely in charge. TEeRrRrIifFyYiInNgG 
In many cases, the possessed host may not even know he is possessed. The creature’s appearance, form or aura is so terrifying it forces 

viewers to make an unopposed Willpower roll. Success indicates the 
PossseessssioNn,, DOoMmIiNnAaNnTt viewer is shaken for one round and cannot act offensively. Failure 

More blatant than its covert cohort, dominant possession occurs causes them to flee in terror. A fumble causes the viewer to collapse 
when the creature’s mind or spirit takes full control of a possessed unconscious from the shock. Only a critical success allows the viewer 
body. The identity (INT, POW and CHA) of the body’s owner is to act unhindered. The viewer need not make any further checks for 
subsumed beneath the identity of the possessing spirit. The pos- the remainder of the combat, even if more of the same creatures 
sessed victim is absolutely helpless, unable to take any are present. Repeated exposure to a specific type of Terrifying 
action at all, unable even to regain Magic monster may eventually permit 
Points, a prisoner in his own body. e the skill check to become 
The possessor is in complete o one or more 

grades 
easier. 



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

TRrAaMmPpLlEe 
The creature is able to trample beings with a SIZ of half or less CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs aASs 

than its own, using its Athletics skill to attack. This inflicts damage 
equal to twice the creature’s base Damage Modifier, and increases CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 
the Size of the attack by one step. How, and when trample is used Any sapient creature (with an INT of 8+) can be used as a player 

depends on the circumstances. If immobile the creature may tram- character if the Games Master is prepared to allow such exotic 

ple a prone opponent on its turn, but this costs an Action Point. If characters in their MYTHRAS campaign. Some species, such as elves, 

the trample is performed whist the creature is moving or charging dwarves, and trolls are, indeed, fantasy staples, and their general 

over an opponent, then the trample is a Free Action. similarities to humans lend themselves readily to play. Others are 
less suited as player characters, usually due to being creatures of 

UNnDdEeAaDd such diverse psychology and physiology that they might not mesh 
Being already dead, the creature is immune to the consequences well with the other characters in the players’ group. A giant amongst 

of both fatigue and severe injuries. Undead are thus immune to all a group of humans or dwarves, for instance, can be an entertaining 
the detrimental effects of Serious Wounds. Even Major Wounds addition but will pose problems in certain conditions. 
do not incapacitate them, although they can still have locations Games Masters must carefully consider whether or not to allow a 
severed or shattered as per normal. Treat the head or chest loca- particular species as a player character, and to weigh-up the poten- 
tion of the undead creature as the area where the spirit or magic tial drawbacks before play begins. However a great deal of fun can 
has been bound. Any location (and those contiguous to it) which is be had from allowing exotic species into a campaign, as long as 
smashed or severed from the bound area ceases to function, but the both players and Games Masters are aware, and accepting of, the 
remainder of the body can continue if it still has limbs with which potential complications that might arise. Players, too, must also take 
to act. A Major Wound to the magic-infused location destroys the into consideration the challenges of playing an exotic creature as a 
undead outright. Only fully corporeal dead creatures may possess character. Playing an Iqari, for example means the character can fly, 
the Undead trait. but has difficulties communicating verbally owing to its physiology. 

This may prove to be a barrier to roleplaying — or it may be a terrific 
VAaMmPpIiRrIiCc opportunity, depending on how the player approaches the role. 

The creature drains its victim’s blood, causing an increase in It must always be remembered that different races and species 
Tatigue levels. The creature must use a bite attack, and cause dam- have different psychologies and drives. Playing an Iqgari in the same 
age with the bite to be able to drain blood at the rate described in way one would run a human character is to do a disservice to that 
the creature’s description. species. 

A final consideration is that there is no concept of balance 
VEenNoOMmOoUuSs between creatures of different races or species. Whilst their cultural 

The creature has a venomous bite, sting or other means of attack. and professional skills may start out at similar levels, their physical or 
The creature’s description provides the game mechanic effects for mental capabilities may be far, far superior. Thus permitting some- 
the particular poison used. A venomous creature may, if desired, one to play an Iqari character in a party of humans might cause 
apply its poison by use of the Inject Venom special effect. resentment amongst the rest of the players, or pose a difficulty for 

the Games Master to provide suitable challenges without placing the 
InNJjeEcCtT VEenNoOmM other characters at risk. 

Whilst the stinger of a scorpion’s tail or the fangs of a cobra are 
extremely threatening, a strike from the natural weapons of a venomous 

CRrEeAaTtuURrEe CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr CRrEeAaTtIioOnN 
creature does not necessarily indicate that venom was injected. Fangs might 

Non-human characters are created in almost exactly the same 
not pass a blocking shueld or stingers fail to penetrate armour. Using the 

way as humans. Characteristics are determined using the character- 
Inject Venom manoeuvre indicales a spectfic desirefor the creature to poison 

istic dice for that species, which will result in different characteristic 
uts_foe. In exchangef orf orfeiting any chance to inflict damage, the creature 

values and ranges, but otherwise all the other elements: attributes, 
Jfinds a weak point in the defence/armous; bypassing it only for the pur- 

culture, profession, and so on, are factored as normal. Of course, 
poses of applying its venom — for example a large venomous snake might 

creatures may have very different cultural bases resulting in different 
attack a warrior wearing chainmarl armour and instead of inflicting dam- 

skills and professions, but nothing stops a Games Master from simply 
age from the bite, ducks past the victim’s parry to merely scratch the back 

adapting the nominally human tables if it is fitting for his setting. 
of the his sword hand, poisoning him. This combat manoeuvre can be used 

Space does not permit individual treatments of culture and 
both offenswely and defensively by venomous creatures. 

career for all possible playable species; however some staple fan- 
- 4 tasy races have been given expanded details for cultural and career 

options. Some of these can be readily applied to species without 
VUuLlNnEeRrAaBbLlEe such detail, or serve as examples or inspiration for developing appro- 

The creature’s natural and magical protection cannot mitigate priate cultural and career packages. For those races that have been 
damage caused by a specific type of source. This source (cold, fire, given greater depth, notes regarding psychology are also provided, 
iron, etc.) will be noted as part of the trait, but a narrative descrip- to assist with roleplaying. 
tion may be included for some specific vulnerabilities. For example, 
silver weapons might pass through the skin of a werewolf. 

218



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

presented are for a typical young adult of the species, and 
NooOnN--HHuUmMAaNn POoIiNnTts BuiiLldD should be increased for older, more experienced individuals. 

Players who wish to play non-human characters may assign charac- & Combat Styles — The Combat Style(s) the creature uses, the 
teristics using the Points Build method (see page 8). The exact same rules percentage, and then the weapons included in the style. 
apply to building non-humans, except that the starting pool of points will & Weapons — The statistics for the creature’s available weapons, 
be based upon the totalled average characteristics of the selected species as listed in the Combat Style. 
or race. & Special Notes — Any game mechanics peculiar to the crea- 

For example an Igari being created using the Points Build method ture: poisons for example, or breath weapon details. 
would start with a rather staggering 108 points (rounded up) for is seven & Player Character Options — Culture, career, and other 
characteristics. However, an Iqari must have a minimum STR of 15, information necessary for playing the creature as a player 
SIZ and DEX of 14, CON and INoTf  8, and a POW and CHA of character. 
3. S0 there are some Limitations on how points can be assigned. 

Games Masters should consider carefully whether to allow players to 
use the Points Buald method when creating creature characters. If the nat- 
ural Characteristics and Attributes of an average member of this species 

Creature Competence
are likely to cause umbrage amongst other players, then a creature which REATURE OMPETENCE 
can be tweaked to garner even more extreme Attribute bonuses will likely Just like humans, creatures — especially sapient ones — display 

different levels of competence in their skills and abilities. Survival of 
disrupt the game. 

the fittest ensures that the most competent prevail, but even so there 
N s will always be differing levels of competence between individuals of 

a species. 

THhEe STtAaTtIiSsTtIicCSs BLloOCckK 
Creature statistics are arranged in a table format called the Statis- How SKkIilLlLeEdD CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

tics Block (or Stat Block for short). The block is arranged as follows: 
SHhooOuUlLdD BEe 

& Creature Name — The creature’s name, and any alternatives. The creatures detailed in this chapter all have skill values listed, 
& Description — A description of the creature’s appearance, and these reflect those for a typical young adult member of the spe- 

demeanour, temperament, and so on, along with any addi- cies. The values are derived by calculating the base for the skill, just 
tional useful notes. as for human characters, and then modifying the base to reflect expe- 

& Characteristics — The characteristic dice for the creature; rience and knowledge (or developed instincts). Generally a creature 
used when creating a bespoke version of the creature. In will have skill base plus between 20 and 40 percentage points, rep- 
parenthesis after each are the average values of the character- resenting its parental training or self learning during adolescence. 
istic dice. This is useful when a quick sample of the creature is There are, however, those individuals that represent either the 
needed. The averages are also used to calculate the creature’s fittest, strongest, cleverest cream of the species or the older, wiser, 
attributes given in its description. Remember that a creature more experienced survivors. When designing creatures as adversar- 
with INS uses this to replace INT when calculating Action ies or points of interaction, Games Masters should take into account 
Points and Initiative. these possible exceptions, and adjust skills according to the creature’s 

& Hit Locations — Every creature has Hit Locations and Hit age, degree of maturity, life lessons, wisdom, and so forth. It is rea- 
Points. Humanoid creatures use the same Hit Locations range sonable to increase appropriate skills by a further 20 to 40 percen- 
as humans although there may be some variations depending tiles to reflect these elements. 
on precise physiology. Creatures with physiologies differing Therefore it is perfectly valid for characters to encounter sea- 
from humans have a different range of Hit Locations. A sum- soned creatures which far exceed the average in terms of skill, thus 
mary of the different physiology Hit Locations (quadruped, remaining a challenge even for the toughest of adventurers. 
winged, and so on) are provided on pages 276-277. 

& Attributes — The creature’s Action Points, Movement, Initia- 

tive Bonus, and so forth, are figured using the Average charac- How t1o BAaLlaANnCcEe CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

teristic values but otherwise according to the same rules as for 
AGgAaIiNnSsTt CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

humans, as found in the Basic Character Creation chapter. 
The common reason for introducing a creature is combat. In 

& Armour — What armour, natural or fabricated, the creature 
this case the skills the creature has — especially in terms of Com- 

has. Creatures with natural armour, such as scales or a thick 
bat Styles and skills frequently used in combat, such as Endurance 

hide, do not incur any Armour Penalty to their Initiative. 
and Evade — should be considered in comparison with the skills of 

& Abilities — Specific abilities possessed by the creature (such 
the characters likely to battle it. There is no hard and fast need to 

as Flying). 
balance creatures against character skills: one of the challenges is 

& Magic — If a creature uses magic then the type of magic it 
in seeing how well characters fare against opponents that have a 

uses, and the necessary skills (Folk Magic, for instance) are 
degree of edge; but if characters frequently find themselves facing 

also listed here along with typical spells its uses. 
creatures that have substantially better skills and, perhaps even more 

& Skills — Every creature has the skills Athletics, Brawn, Endur- 
importantly, numbers, the likelihood of character injury and death 

ance, Evade and Willpower listed. Other skills pertinent to the 
rises dramatically, which can be frustrating for the players. Here, 

creature, such as Swim, are listed where needed. The values 

219



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

then, are some guidelines for helping to balance encounters whilst develop an instinct for what their group can handle according to the 
still retaining tension and challenge. player’s roleplaying style and aggressiveness. 

1. Look at the abilities a creature has. Certain abilities give 
How CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs FIigGhHTt 

creatures an innate advantage over opponents. Decide how 
Sapient creatures apply their intelligence and reasoning to their 

these abilities will be used by the creature, and consider 
environment, opponents and the impending combat It is relatively 

whether the potency of an ability means that the number 
easy for Games Masters to direct the actions of sapient species 

of creatures of the same type the characters face should be 
because humans, being sapient, naturally relate to reasoning, and 

equal to, or less than, the size of the character’s party. 
reasoned assessments. 

2. Consider the example skills of the creature, especially those 
Creatures that operate primarily on instinct — animals, naturally, 

involved in combat, and compare them with either the 
but any creature with the INS characteristic — tend to act differently; 

average skills of the party or the character with the highest 
which will mean combat situations need to be handled according to 

similar skill. If the creature’s skills, and certainly its Combat 
how animals and instinct-driven creatures usually act if the combat 

Style, are equal to the characters’, or in a range of 10 to 
is to be portrayed with any degree of verisimilitude. 

20 points higher, then the challenge posed should still be 
The following notes are designed to help Games Masters prepare 

manageable. 
and run such encounters in a realistic and challenging manner. 

3. Also consider the Armour, Hit Points and Weapons of the 
creature. Tougher creatures take longer to subdue or kill. 

REeAaSsoONnSs fFoOrR ATtTtaAcCkK 
Creatures with fearsome weapons will inflict a lot of dam- Animals rarely attack without purpose. Random, unprovoked 
age, and could potentially carve a swathe through the char- attacks are relatively uncommon, and even the smartest animal usu- 
acters, especially if encountered in large numbers. ally has a reason for initiating combat. Food is a primary motivator, 

4. Think about the creature’s tactics, habits and nature. Some but it is rare for animals to attack something bigger than themselves 
perform hit and run tactics, slowly whittling down their foes unless they operate in numbers large enough to overwhelm the prey. 
whereas others only attack from ambush. Choosing differ- Lone animals, especially those of roughly human size and mass, are 
ent tactics can radically change how an encounter plays out. likely to steer clear of humans unless absolutely driven by starvation 
See How Creatures Fight below. to contemplate an attack. The second motivator is the protection 

5. Understand the effect of numbers. Multiple numbers of of herd or offspring. If an animal has young, then the young are a 
smaller, weaker or less skilled creatures can be set against a target for predators: the parents will therefore instinctively attack a 
party, outnumbering them two or three to one if well han- potential predator with the aim of driving it away, and making sure 
dled. Creatures which approach equivalence with charac- it understands that the young are not an easy feast. Thirdly there are 
ters should rarely outnumber the party save for climactic creatures who seek to defend their territory, secking to conserve its 
situations. Those that are more potent should themselves resources for their own use. In all these situations a fight to the death 
be outnumbered by the characters, or else the party be is not necessarily on the agenda. 
obliterated. 

6. Does a creature use magic? If so, will it have had the chance ]JuUdDGg]inNgG tThHEe oODdDdSs 

to prepare any spells prior to engagement? Magic using Most dangerous animals prefer to have little to do with humans, 
creatures tend be sapient, and so they should use magic with and don’t take on superior numbers. They normally only fight when 
a similar degree of tactical thought as the player characters. the advantage is in their favour; such as one on one or when their 
The type of magic and spells available will also be helpful in victim is sleeping. 
deciding numbers present. Similarly, competency in magic 
and the spells available may need to be balanced with the InNtTiImMiIdDaAtTiIoOnN 
characters’ own magical skills and spells. Many animals rarely get round to initiating combat. Large her- 

7. Tinally, never assume that all creatures fight to the bitter bivores for example will tend to intimidate first. This can be used to 

end. A cornered animal may have no choice, but whenever scare a party or give them fair warning that something bad might 

circumstances permit it the law of survival takes over, and happen if they force the issue. Backing off might ‘win’ them the 

creatures will flee or surrender, depending on their nature. encounter, as the animal is likely to also depart peacefully if the 

The fittest only prevail if they survive and learn from their threat is removed. After all it doesn’t want to be injured either. Pred- 

experience and this equally true for all creatures. Only the ators, too, use intimidation to warn off threats, although the chances 

most desperate and insane will fight to the absolute death. If of intimidation turning into aggression are likely to be higher, espe- 

a pack leader flees, then its followers are likely to follow on cially if the characters represent an easy meal. Intimidation takes 

its heels. Similarly, unless the creatures view the characters the form of physical and verbal gestures: growling, snarling, lowered 

as food, they are unlikely to kill those that submit, flee or horns, raking of the ground and slow, deliberate movements towards 

withdraw. This simple fact alone can be used to balance an the foe which allow energy to be prepared for a blistering assault if 

encounter and ensure that complete bloodbaths are a rarity. necessary. Intimidatory tactics are designed to get the foe to increase 
its distance, and flee. Only if intimidation fails will most animals 

Other than this advice MYTHRAS does not provide any hard rules 
launch an attack. 

to balance creature encounters, since the variables of any conflict 
are too diverse to model. However, Games Masters should find they 

220



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

KIiLllLiInNgG i1sS nNOoTt AaLlwWAaYySs tThHEe oOBbJjEeCcTtIivVEe its victims by slow attrition until they realise the challenge faced, and 

In some circumstances creatures are not really interested in kill- adapt their tactics accordingly. 

ing humans, even when deliberately provoked or attacked. In such 
situations if a creature manages to injure its attackers, it will not POo1isSoOnN AanNDd LeEaAVvEe ThHEemM 

necessarily attempt to kill its foe or even inflict a lethal Special Effect. Similar in concept to the Hit and Run except the venomous crea- 

All it really wants is to be left alone, and will cease fighting once ture remains just long enough to give a victim an incapacitating or 

resistance ceases, leaving the wounded behind it. fatal dose of venom then retreats before it can be hurt. The creature 
then follows its poisoned victim until it is unable to defend itself and 

FLleEeEiInNgG rRaAtThHEeRr tThHaAnN dDEeAatThH can be eaten, used as an egg incubator, and so on. 

Many, indeed most creatures will flee when wounded. This can 
turn a simple combat encounter into a tracking challenge or game ATtTtaAcCkK bByY PAaCckK 
of cat and mouse, since most animals have superior movement rates A classic tactic of wolves, lions, and similar creatures which tend 

and abilities to humans in their natural environment. Superior not to face their prey one on one. Most of the pack simply circles the 

numbers may influence fight-or-flee decisions, and be instigated by a victim whilst one member jumps forward to make a single attack, 

pack or herd leader, but usually a creature will attempt to flee rather then immediately evades back out of reach, whilst a new pack 

than face certain extinction. member subsequently attacks from another direction. Packs will not 
attack simultaneously unless the fighting area is too small for them 

BEeIinNgG OUuTtNnUuMmBbEeRrEeDd to spread out (as they instinctively prefer). Likewise a herd of herbi- 

Understand the limits of a lone creature. Placing a large bear vores can be a serious threat if they gang up to protect their young 

against a party using spears will simply see the bear being slaugh- (as elephants do) or stampede towards a party. 

tered. Do not think that it means the combat system is broken: it 
is precisely what would happen in real life. The bear might get to FiIgGhHTtIinNgG aATt EXxTtrReEmMEe CLlOoSsEe RAaNnGgEe 

wound or maim one or two opponents but ultimately, being outnum- The safest defence for most animals is to close down into extreme 

bered, it will lose (assuming it cannot flee). close range. This can be done automatically if the creature has leapt 
on its victim, ambushed it, or charges into contact. The creature 

UNnuussuAaLl TacTtiics could even use the Change Range special effect if the tactical situ- 

Predators use tactical tricks to catch prey. Games Masters should ation starts differently. Once closed upon, the victim will be unable 

replicate this. A hunting creature will not willingly attack multiple to defend themselves with most weapons, and will probably have to 

opponents head-on but it will use stealth and camouflage to creep resort to Unarmed Combat. In this situation, provided the animal 

up on a victim and attack with surprise. If stalking a dangerous foe isn’t outnumbered, it should gain the upper hand; especially if it is 

it will ambush a lone target, not one surrounded by compatriots. A sitting on top of a prone victim. 

man-eating tiger for instance will leap on someone going into the 
bushes to relieve himself; or sneak into the outermost tent of a camp. CHhAaRrGgIinNGg 
If it incapacitates the victim, it will drag him off into concealment Being repeatedly charged (or dive bombed) by a fast moving ani- 

before any cries can summon aid. In these sorts of situations a crea- mal is especially disconcerting. Using a charge means the victim has 

ture might use Grip and Entangle or have their own special Combat a single choice of whether to Evade, Defend or Attack the charging 

Effects such as Silent Attack or Paralyse. Big creatures with long tails beast as it thunders by. The creature may also have the Trample 

might be able to do sweep attacks to take down multiple foes; those ability which is really bad for the victim if knocked over during the 

with tentacles might grapple multiple opponents; sabre tooth cats charge. Between each attack the creature can gallop past, and be out 

might always begin with knocking a victim prone, and so on. of range or back into cover, then spend an indeterminate period of 
time preparing for the next attack. A rhino or aurochs would be a 

USsIinNgG TEeRrRrAaIinN good example of a creature using this tactic. 

Animals adapted to particular environments have an additional 
advantage. Imagine a giant trapdoor spider which not only grabs UNnAaRrMmEeDd COoMmBbAaTt 
the last person in a line (so that the other characters cannot see what 
happens) but also drags the body into a narrow underground burrow COoNnSsIiDdEeRrAaTtIioONnSs 
where it can crunch on its victim’s body whilst none of his friends The Unarmed skill has been subsumed into some creatures’ 
can reach him. Other examples might be apes which swing down Combat Style, providing a general sense of how they fight with nat- 
from high tree limbs to strike or grab opponents, where the dense ural weapons. INS-based creatures can normally only attack once 
foliage may block vision and missile weapons. Consider the envi- with each limb or location per round; thus a giant scorpion with 
ronment and the creature’s place within it, using the nature of the three Combat Actions could attack once with its left claw, once with 
environment against the opponents. the right, and attempt one sting per round. 

Some animals however, especially herbivores, only possess a sin- 
Hiit AanNDd RUuNn gle method of attack, which appears to place them at a disadvantage 

Very frustrating, but true to the genre of fantastical game hunters 
in close combat. In these cases the creature is more likely to evade 

is the smart carnivore which injures members of the safari one by or simply flee from attack, and should be roleplayed doing so. Other 
one. The animal does not remain around for an extended combat. animals might attack using other tactics already explored in the pre- 
Instead it lays ambushes, leaping out to make a single bite or claw vious section. 
attack before diving back into cover, and escaping reprisal. It beats 

221



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

UNnAaRrMmEeDd COoMmBbAaTt AaGgAaIinNSsTt WEeAaPpOoNnSs Deerfaurlt NAaTtUuRrAaLl WEeAaPpOoNnSs fFoOrR 

As described in the Combat chapter, unarmed combat can be UNnUuSsUuAaLlLlYy S1izZeEdD CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 
used defensively to parry a weapon attack. Damage is reduced as The damage capability of a creature’s natural weapons is usually 
per normal, according to the comparative Sizes of the natural and a function of its basic size. Some beings however may have unusually 
wielded weapon. Whilst this often plays into the favour of bigger big or small examples depending on its physiology and proportions. 
creatures, especially when bashing through the defence of an armed Humans for example have ineffectual natural weapons, thus the size 
opponent, it does not necessarily cut both ways. and damage of their limbs is one step less than default, dropping to 

It is actually quite rare for non-sapient beasts to actively parry 1d3 damage, Size Small and Reach Touch. 
weapon blows, since they lack the intellect and knowledge of how to Games Masters should treat the following tables as average val- 
do so in relative safety. Instead most INS based creatures in fact rely ues. If a creature has more than one type of natural weapon, the 
upon their natural armour or use evasion to avoid an attack. Size or Reach of one may be increased, possibly at the expense of 

In a few cases however, a creature with an instinctive blocking reducing the value of another. The values in the following tables 
or grappling combat style might actually be able to parry an attack. have been applied to most of the creatures within this book, with 
Likewise animals possessing resilient armaments of chitin, horn or some variation for those with body frames and limbs disproportion- 
similar substances may simply flail about, accidentally interposing ate to their mass. 
their natural weapons in the path of a blow. These creatures are 
given the Formidable Natural Weapons trait, permitting them to NAaTtUuRrAaLl WEeAaPpOoNn DAaMmAaGgEe 

parry in combat. 
Creature SIZ BashiCrushiClaz te/Stab Damage 

This does not mean that an unarmed creature lacking the For- Damage 

midable Natural Weapons trait cannot attempt to parry the blow 1-10 1d3 1d4 

anyway. Doing so can potentially prevent their foe from gaining an 11-20 1d4 1d6 

automatic combat Special Effect against them; but if the attack is 
21-30 1d6 1d8 

successful the creature must suffer any damage directly to the limb 
31-40 1d8 1d10 

used to successtully parry. Armour Points on that location still count 
41-50 1d10 1d12 

towards protection. 
51-60 1d12 2d6 

NAaTtUuRrAaLl WEeAaPpOoNn COoMmBbAaTt EFfFfEeCcTtSs 
Similar to weapons such as swords or spears, natural weapons are NAaTtUuRrAaLl WEeAaPpOoNn S1izZeE AanNDd REeAaCchH 

able to inflict certain special effects in combat due to their shape and 
flexibility. The following table lists what weapon-specific effects are Creature Size Bite Horn Limb To;‘i:e l 

available to each type of natural weapon. SIZ Reach Reach Reach Reach 

NAaTtUuRrAaLl WEeAaPpOoNnSs SPpEeCcIiaALl EFfFfEeCcTtSs 1-10 S T T S M 

11-20 M T S M M 
Type Combat Effects 

21-30 L S M M L 
Beak, Pointed Impale 

31-40 H M M L L 
Beak, Tearing Bleed, Grip 

41-50 E M L L VL 
Claws/Talons Bleed, Grip 

51-60 (@ L L VL VL 
Hand/Fist Grip, Stun Location, Take Weapon 

Hoof Bash, Stun 

Horns Impale 

Paw Stun Location ARrMmEeDd COoMmBbAaTt 
Pincer Grip, Sunder 

Proboscis Impale COoNnSsIiDdEeRrAaTtIioONnSs 
Stinger Impale Most situations involving armed combat are covered in the Com- 

Tail Bash, Entangle, Grip bat chapter. However, due to the scaling imposed by creatures which 

Teeth, Crushing Grip are either bigger or smaller than average humans, several important 
modifications are clarified here. 

Teeth, Grasping Grip, Impale 

Teeth, Incising Bleed 
WEeAaPpOoNn MOoDIdFifIiCcAaTtIioONnSs fFoOrR 

Tentacle Grip, Take Weapon 
UNnUuSsUuAaLlLlYy S1izZeEdD CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Tusk Impale 
When a creature wields a weapon rather than fighting unarmed, 

Wing Bash, Entangle it gains certain bonuses or penalties which reflect the consequence 
of its size. Thus a mace used by a man, and a mace used by a troll 
are ostensibly the same style of weapon, proportionately in scale 
with their wielders; but the troll mace will be somewhat larger, and 
more massive. This bonus also counts for ranged weapons, providing 
they are built to scale. 

222



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

For each 10 points of SIZ over 20 the wielder gains a bonus of 
+1 step to both weapon Size and Reach. DEeSsIigGnNIinNgG YoOUuRr 

If the increased weapon characteristics place the creature beyond 
the nominal human sized maximums of Enormous and Very Long, OwwWnN CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 
blows effectively become unstoppable, and the body of the creature Games Masters are encouraged to design their own MYTHRAS 

unreachable by most player characters, and thus further steps need creatures — be they creatures from myth and legend, those inspired 

not be considered. by popular fantasy fiction, or even unique creations of the Games 

If a fight is staged between two colossal creatures, Games Mas- Master’s own imagination. There are two approaches one can take. 

ters can note the number of bonus steps, and base a ruling on the Find a creature from this chapter that approximates the new 

comparative vales to see if a defending creature is capable of deflect- creature, and then modify its characteristics, abilities, skills, and so 

ing such blows, or can enter range. forth to reflect the new beast. This is usually the easiest method as 
much of the work is done for you, and the key task is in tailoring the 

WEeAaPpOoNn Sii1zzeE aAnNDd REeaAcChH BOoNnUuSs new creature to make it distinct. 

Armed Creature The second approach is to build the creature from scratch. Here 
SIz Weapon Size Bonus Weapon Reach Bonus 

are some guidelines to assist. 

1-10 -1 Step -1 Step 

11-20 - - 1. Creature characteristics are figured using d3 or d6 multi- 
ples in a very similar way to humans. No creature should 

21-30 +1 Step +1 Step 
have more than 4d6 in any characteristic, but bigger, more 

31-40 +2 Steps +2 Steps 
powerful/faster creatures incorporate a generous addition 

41-50 +3 Steps +3 Steps 
to this roll. A mammoth, for example, has STR 2d6+40 
giving it a range of 42 to 52 and an average of 47. 

WEeAaPpOoNn CAaTtEegGoORrYy PRrOoGgRrEeSsSsIioOnN 
2. How big is the creature? If roughly human-sized then it is 

reasonable to use 2d6+6 as the base for its SIZ character- 
Small Touch istic. If it is larger then consider by how much, and either 

Medium Short adjust the dice used for SIZ or the bonus to the dice roll if 

Large Medium a minimum SIZ increase is needed. Note that the creatures 
presented here use a SIZ value based on mass, and that the 

Huge Long 
Creature Size Equivalency table does not scale linearly. So 

Enormous Very Long 
the bigger the base SIZ the fewer dice should be used — oth- 

Colossal Unreachable 
erwise the dice spread could allow creatures of two to three 
times the mass of an average specimen. 

3. A creature’s STR does not necessarily need to be the same 
WIiEeLlDdIinNgG DIiSspPrRoOPpOoRrTtIioONnAaTtEeLlYy S1iIzZeEdD WEeAaPpOoNnSs as its SIZ, since as creatures grow bigger their strength to 

Sometimes a character might wish to loot a monstrous foe of his 
mass ratio tends to drop. A lower STR value also helps keep 

weapon, and attempt to utilise it in combat. This may pose problems 
a creature’s Damage Bonus within the bounds of surviv- 

for, whilst a human-scaled shortsword may be the equivalent of a 
ability for armoured humans — a necessary consideration if 

mere dagger to a troll, conversely the troll’s two handed maul would 
your creature is intended to fight against characters. 

be too massive to wield for a normal man. 
4. How intelligent is the creature? Sapient creatures — those 

Use the following table to discern the largest single handed and 
with the ability to reason, problem-solve and be driven by 

double handed ‘Size’ of weapon a creature can use. This is only a 
choice rather than instinct — should have a base of 2d6+6 

rough guideline since some weapons are utilised in unusual ways, 
to place them on a par with humans, if their INT is likely 

couched lances for example. 
to be in the human range. Of course some creatures may 
have more refined intellects, or indeed, be rather slow wit- 

MAaximMmuumM WEeAaPpOoNn Sii1zzeE ted, and barely better thinkers than animals. Calculate INS 

Character SIZ Largest Single Largest Double as described in Intelligence and Instinct at the start of this 

Handed Handed* chapter. 

1-10 Small Large 5. The creature’s DEX should be assessed and figured in a 
similar way to STR, SIZ and INT/INS. Fast, agile crea- 

11-20 Medium Huge 
tures or those with many limbs will naturally have a higher 

21-30 Large Enormous 
DEX than humans so adjust the dice and/or dice addition 

31-40 Huge Colossal 
to reflect its DEX relative to a human. Slow sluggish beasts 

41-50 Enormous Don’t even think about it! 
will naturally have a lower DEX rating. 

* Use this column for single-handed shields 6. POW for most sapient creatures is in the human range of 
3d6. However some supernatural monsters or mythical 
creatures may have a higher propensity for magic in some 
form, or be products of it. In this case raise the dice or dice 
addition to reflect any innate magical tendencies or pro- 
pensities. Mundane animals tend to have less POW), rarely 

223



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

CRrEeAaTtUuRrEe S1IZ EQqUuIiVvAaLleEnNCcYy TAaBbLlEe 
FiIgGhHTtIinNgG QUuAaDdRrUuPpEeDdSs 

SI1zZ Kilos SI1zZ Kilos SI1zZ Kilos SIZ Kilos 
As a rule when four legged animals fight, the creature places its head 

1 up to 5 26 238-258 51 2069-2259 | 76~ 18001-19600 
lowards its opponent. Given the size of most quadrupeds, it s difficultfor 
a lone human opponent to strike any location other than the forequarters, 2 6-11 27 259-282 52 2260-2468 | 77 19601-21500 

Jront legs or head of the beast. For this reason, it s suggested that when a 3 12-16 28 238-307 53 2469-2690 | 78  21501-23400 

character attacks such an animal, they roll a d10+10 for the Hit Loca- 4 17-23 29 308-335 57 2691-2931 79 23401-25800 

tion. Of course, tf the animal is surrounded by multiplef oes, then thefull 5 24-35 30 336-366 55 2932-3199 | 80  25801-27800 

range of uls target locations should be available. 6 36-41 3l 367-399 56 3200-3490 | 81 27801-30300 

N 4 7 42-49 32 400-436 57 3491-3809 | 82 30301-33100 

8 50-55 58 437-476 58 3810-4149 | 83  33101-36100 

exceeding 2d6, with smaller animals or more primitive 9 56-58 34 477-518 59 4150-4531 84 36101-39400 
insectoid life possessing even less. 10 59-64 5 519-567 60 4532-4954 | 85  39401-43000 

7. Charisma is only of importance when designing sapient 
11 65-70 36 568-617 61 4955-5363 | 86  43001-46700 

creatures that interact socially on a meaningful scale and 
12 71-76 37 618-672 62 5364-5863 | 87  46701-51200 

with other species. CHA is a measure of personality and its 
13 77-83 38 673-754 63 5864-6409 | 88  51201-55800 

communication rather than looks and appearance, so use 
14 84-91 39 755-799 64 6410-7000 | 89  55801-59400 

the human range of 3d6 as the base, and adjust upwards 
or downwards only if the creature’s personality is espe- 15 92-99 40 800-872 65 7001-7600 | 90  59401-66300 

cially extrovert, introvert or alien. In games where the char- 16 100-109 | 41 873-950 66 7601-8300 | 91 66301-67500 

acters are all members of a non humano-centric species, 17 110-118 | 42 951-1040 67 8301-9000 |92  67501-71900 

the Games Master can adjust CHA scores so that it is the 18 119-130 | 43 1041-1131 68 9001-9800 | 93  71901-76700 

characters’ race who get 3d6, and the weird humans who 19 131-140 | 44 1132-1231 69  9801-10800 | 94  76701-81700 

have less, since they cannot understand or comprehend the 20 141-154 | 45 1232-1349 | 70  10801-11700 | 95  81701-87100 
culture. 

21 155-167 | 46 1350-1468 | 71  11701-12800 | 96  87101-87900 
8. Skills should be chosen according to the creature’s primary 

22 168-182 | 47 1469-1599 72 12801-14000 | 97  87901-88800 
needs and its environment. Sapient, social creatures obvi- 

23 183-199 | 48 1600-1741 73 14001-15100 | 98  88801-89700 
ously may have access to the full range of human skills whilst 
others will have only those skills related to their immediate 24 200-218 | 49 1742-1899 | 74  15101-16600 | 99  89701-90600 

needs and capabilities. Skill base values are figured as per 25 219-237 | 50 1900-2068 75 16601-18000 | 100  90601-91500 

humans, but should then be subject to further adjustment - 
say +30% - to reflect the creature’s nature. CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Abilities follow from the creature’s nature. Aerial creatures obvi- The creatures that follow are derived from myth, legend, the nat- 
ously need the Flying ability; aquatic creatures need the Swimmer ural world and, in a few cases, popular fantasy media. A broad selec- 
ability, and so on. Consider the creature’s overall nature, physiology, tion is given, and is by no means exhaustive. In some cases similar 
faculties, environment, and any specific, exotic talents it might dis- species with slightly different appearances have been conflated. In 
play and apply the relevant abilities. It is recommended though that, the main these are corporeal creatures; the more intangible threats 
except in rare cases, few creatures receive more than three abilities such as ghostly phantoms or wraiths have their own section subtitled 
from those listed earlier in this chapter. Spirits. 

There is also a focus on creatures that offer a legitimate challenge 

COoMmPpAaRrAaTtIiVvEe WEeIiGgHhTtSs to MYTHRAS characters — for this reason we have not included some 
examples, mainly animals, which would offer little in the way of 

Creatures do not follow the same height and weight progression 
danger or will typically run and hide when adventurers stray into 

as for humanoids. Increasing SIZ relates to a different scaling of 
their territories. 

mass, muscle and bone density. Generally MYTHRAS keeps specific 
weights abstracted, but should it be necessary to know the rough 
weight of a creature, use the following SIZ Equivalency Table. The 
table can also be used for determining the weight of inanimate 
objects. 

Note that since SIZ is abstracted to a degree, the reach and 
size of natural weapons should be adjusted to cater for differently 
dimensioned and proportioned creatures. 

224



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

ACcEePpHhAaLlIi 
A strange race of humanoids that completely lack any form 

of head or neck. The acephali’s facial features are located instead 
across its chest and abdomen meaning that these creatures cannot 
wear any form of clothing or armour across these areas. 

Acephali are primitive herders and shepherds occupying hilly 
terrain. They make crude stone huts and cabins, but prefer natural 
caves when they can be found. They are a surly, but not necessarily 
aggressive race, which prefers to keep its own company. Most sapi- 
ents find the lack of a head extremely disturbing making communi- 
cation with acephali tense at the best of times. 

Given the vulnerability of their chest and abdominal regions 
acephali prefer ranged weapons and try to avoid melee combat. 
They are excellent slingers and archers. Some acephali carry a spe- 
cially crafted heater with an eye-slit carved above the boss allowing 
for the chest and abdomen to be protected with passive blocking 
whilst the free arm is used to wield the sling. 

Acephali Attributes 

STR: 2d6+6 (13) Action Points 3 

CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier +1d2 

SIZ: 2d6+6 (13) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 8m 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 11 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Typically Leather 

CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities None 

Magic Tolk Magic 56% (Befuddle, 

Coordination, Firearrow) 

1d20 Location AP/HP 
ANnTt,, GIiaAnNTt 

1-3 Right Leg 1/5 
Giant ants are hive-dwellers, and operate under the direction of 

46 Left Leg 1/5 a queen with individuals taking on very specific roles (typically war- 

7-10 Abdomen 0/6 rior or worker) necessary for the survival of the hive. Individual ants 
have highly developed instincts but working together in groups their 

11-14 Chest/Face 0/7 
intelligence shows remarkable degrees of problem-solving. Giant 

15-17 Right Arm 1/4 ants are also formidable predators, herding and farming smaller 
18-20 Left Arm 1/4 species of mammals and insects for food and, sometimes, incubation 

of eggs. 
Skills Giant ants use their powerful mandibles to seize, squeeze, and 

Athletics 56%, Brawn 46%, Endurance 52%, Evade 46%, Perception 44%, crush foes. Once seized the ant uses the Grip Combat Effect to hold 
Survival 52%, Track 54%, Willpower 52% onto its prey and, if it continues to resist, moves its thorax around to 

deliver a powerful sting. If poisoned the victim is allowed an Endur- 
Passions ance roll, opposed by the ant’s Endurance, to resist the poison. If the 
Love Solitude 88%, Suspicious of Strangers 80% roll is failed then the location suffers agonising pain, and cannot be 

used for 30-CON minutes. 
Combat Style & Weapons Individual ants are unlikely to engage foes larger than themselves, 
Acephali Hunter (Sling, Bolas, Bow) 66%, Defensive Stance (Spear, Shield) 56% although packs of ants, working together, will have no hesitation in 

attacking. Single ants prefer to evade, wait, and send pheromone 
Weapon Size/ Force Reach Damage 

signals to nearby (or even distant) colleagues, summoning a larger 
Sling L - 1d8+1d2 1/2 party. 

2/2 The statistics overleaf are for a worker or soldier ant. Queens are 
Bolas - - 1d4+1d2 

Entangle twice as large and twice as strong: 4d6+14 STR and SIZ but have 

Short Bow L - 1d6+1d2 4/4 a DEX of only 2d6, reflecting their largely stationery existence in 
the hive. 

Shortspear M L 1d8+1+1d2 4/5 

Heater L S 1d4+1+1d2 6/12 

225



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Ant, Giant Attributes Asipatra Attributes 

STR: 4d6 (14) Action Points 2 STR: 1d6+9 (13) Action Points 3 

CON: 3d6+6 (17) Damage Modifier ~ +1d2 CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier None 

SIZ: 4d6 (14) Magic Points 4 SIZ: 1d6+6 (10) Magic Points 7 

DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 12m DEX: 4d6+6 (20) Movement 12m (Flying) 

INS: 2d6+2 (9) Initiative Bonus 11 INS: 2d6+5 (12) Initiative Bonus 16 

POW: 1d6 (4) Armour Chitin POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Metal Feathers 

Abilities Formidable Natural Weapons, Abilities Diving Attack, Flying, 

Venomous Immunity (Blades) 

Magic None Magic None 

1d20 Location AP/HP 1d20 Location AP/HP 

1 Right Rear Leg 4/6 1-3 Right Claw 6/5 

2 Left Rear Leg 4/6 4-6 Left Claw 6/5 

3 Right Middle Leg 4/6 79 Abdomen 6/6 

4 Left Middle Leg 4/6 10-12 Chest 6/7 

59 Abdomen 4/8 13-15 Right Wing 6/5 

10-13 Thorax 4/9 16-18 Left Wing 6/5 

14 Right Front Leg 4/6 19-20 Head 6/5 

15 Left Front Leg 4/6 

16-20 Head 4/7 

Athletics 32%, Brawn 23%, Endurance 62%, Evade 60%, Fly 72%, Perception 

Skills 59%, Willpower 54% 

Athletics 67%, Brawn 68%, Endurance 74%, Evade 56%, Perception 53%, Track 
Combat Style & Weapons 

66%, Willpower 48% 

Slice and Dice (Claws and Wings) 72% 

Combat Style & Weapons 
Weapon Size /Force Reach Damage 

Ant Attack (Mandibles and Sting) 67% 

Claw S S 1d4 As for Claw 

Size/ Force Reach Damage 
Wing Slice M M 1d6 As for Wing 

Bite M T 1d6+1d2 1/2 

Sting M M 1d4+1d2 As for Head AUuRrOoCcHhSs 
Standing nearly 2m at the shoulder, aurochs are a giant Pleis- 

ASsIipPaAtTrRaA tocene cattle species found across much of northern Europe. They 

A large bird of Hindu myth, asipatra means ‘sword wing’, and are famed for their strength and belligerence. Hunting aurochs is a 

these creatures are the tormentors of souls in the underworld, carv- near suicidal pastime but very rewarding in terms of the quantity of 

ing them with their blade-like wings, and dagger-length claws. meat provided. 

In MyrHRAS these monsters are either summoned from the Aurochs prefer to fight by charging threats with their gore attack. 

underworld or have found their way to the mundane world through If the target is knocked prone and continues to move, the aurochs 

obscure gateways, portals or tunnels. They aim solely to torment and tramples until the victim stops responding. A successful charge 

frustrate, diving and strafing those marked for persecution, inflicting increases the Damage Bonus to 2d8. If lamed an aurochs continues 

painful slices and cuts. Being made of metal they are exceedingly to fight in place until it collapses from exhaustion. 

well-armoured but can still be felled by mundane weapons: note Aurochs horns can span greater than a man’s reach, and curve 

though that they are utterly immune to bladed weapons — swords, forwards from the head in a perfect charging/goring configuration. 

spears, axes, and so forth. Arrows and blunt weapons inflict normal Naturally the horns can impale, and this is a standard Special Effect 

damage. if a charging aurochs manages to gore an enemy. Aurochs horns are 

Usually encountered singly, asipatra are summoned for a specific capable of both Sundering and Impaling and, if a foe is impaled, the 

purpose, be it to punish someone or act as guardians. Others that bull on its next turn will attempt to throw its victim with a toss of its 

migrate from the underworld come searching for those who have head. If the impaled victim is conscious, he may pit either his Athlet- 

committed some form of sin in the eyes of a particular god, and so ics or Acrobatics against the Brawn of the bull. If successful, he may 

can be encountered in numbers; sent as divine punishment for some land safely on his feet or all fours. If unsuccesstul, or if unconscious, 

kind of wrong-doing. the victim suffers the equivalent to a 1d6 metre fall and lands prone. 

Asipatra confined to the mortal world for any length of time 
collect spears, swords, and other sharp objects, forming nests from 
them. 

226



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Aurochs Attributes Baboon Attributes 

STR: 2d6+24 (31) Action Points 2 STR: 1d6+6 (10) Action Points 3 

CON: 3d6+10 (21) Damage Modifier +2d6 CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier -1d2 

SIZ: 4d6+24 (38) Magic Points 7 SIZ: 1d6+6 (10) Magic Points 7 

DEX: 2d6 (7) Movement 12m DEX: 3d6+6 (17) Movement 8m 

INS: 2d6+4 (11) Initiative Bonus 9 INS: 2d6+7 (14) Initiative Bonus 16 

POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Tough Hide POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Fur 

Abilities Intimidate, Trample Abilities Nightsight 

Magic None Magic None 

1d20 Location AP/HP 1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-2 Right Hind Leg 4/12 1-3 Right Leg 1/5 

34 Left Hind Leg 4/12 4-6 Left Leg 1/5 

5-7 Hindquarters 4/13 7-9 Abdomen 1/6 

8-10 Forequarters 4/14 10-12 Chest 1/7 

11-13 Right Front Leg 4/11 13-15 Right Arm 1/4 

14-16 Left Front Leg 4/11 16-18 Left Arm 1/4 

17-20 Head 4/12 19-20 Head 1/5 

Skills 

Athletics 58%, Brawn 89%, Endurance 82%, Evade 34%, Perception 38%, Acrobatics 57%, Athletics 47%, Brawn 40%, Endurance 42%, Evade 74%, 

Willpower 38% Perception 61%, Stealth 61%, Survival 58%, Willpower 54% 

Combat Style & Weapons Combat Style & Weapons 

Gore and Toss (Horns) 68% TFerocious Fracas (Bite, Fist, Thrown Object) 67% 

Weapon Size/ Force Reach Damage Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Gore H M 1d10+2d6 As for Head Bite S T 1d4-1d2 As for Head 

Trample E T 4d6 As for Legs Punch S T 1d3-1d2 As for Arm 

Missile S - 1d3-1d2 As for Object 

BaAbBoOoONn 
Baboons are ground dwelling, and typically found in ifi 

BAaGgIiNngi 
open savannah, open woodland, and hill areas in warm and 

Bagini are vampiric, lustful monsters that are half woman, 
sub-tropical climates. Ostensibly omnivores, they eat insects 

and half animal — usually a dingo, dog, wolf or hyena. They pos- 
and occasionally prey on fish, shellfish, small mammals, 

sess the head and breasts of a human with the rest of the creature 
birds, smaller primates, and small antelopes. Baboons 

being canine in form. In the daylight they appear quite normal, 
are foragers and have been known to raid human s 

and may even forming a friendship with a group of travellers. 
dwellings, preying on sheep and goats } 

At night though, the bagini mutates into its true form where 
Troops of baboons usually feature around 30 ¢ 

it feasts on the males present. 
animals but larger troops are not uncommon. A 

The bagini have two appetites that must be served: 
troop leader can be either male or female, and 

the first is their lust, and the monsters seck to be impreg- 
becomes the dominant figure of the group, | 

nated by males they have befriended so they can 
choosing mates, and ensuring the choic- J 

give birth to more bagini bitches. The initial 
est foods. Baboons are highly vocal and 

seduction is performed as a human but 
use their whoops, shrieks and calls to signal 

the impregnation itself takes place as 
to each other and indicate their positioning in the social 

the she-demon’s true body changes. 
hierarchy. 

The second appetite is blood. The 
The baboon template can be used for larger primates but 

bagini bites whilst it ruts, 
adding additional bonuses: such as gorillas (+9 STR, +12 

and drinks the blood it 
SIZ, 2d6+3 DEX) or man-eating carnivorous apes (+12 

draws. 
STR, +15 SIZ, 2d6 DEX). 

In their true form 
bagini  are incredibly 

strong, and capable of pin- 
ning down a grown man while 



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

they satisfy their urges. Their tactic is therefore to drink blood whilst Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 
mating and, if possible, continue to drink blood once the mating 

Bite M T 1d2+1d4 As for Head 
has finished. A bagini will drain a number of Fatigue levels of blood 
equal to half its CON before it considers itself satiated, which can Claw M M 1d3+1d4 As for Arm 

often lead to the death of the victim. If disturbed it will fight unless 
outnumbered. If females are present, bagini will either not approach 

BAaKkRruU 
or attempt to separate the men from the women so their business 

These strange creatures are magical creations: either acciden- 
can be completed with as little suspicion as possible. 

tally, through the misadventure of sorcery, or by the gods out of 
A bagini only uses its bite attack during intercourse, and the 

some obscure whim. Tiny, mischievous creatures that resemble a 
attack usually comes as a surprise if victim doesn’t notice the pre- 

human child with an oversized head, the bakru’s body is made of 
ceding transformation. The actual bite causes minimal damage but 

wood or plant fibres, lending it a strange, gnarled appearance. Their 
the bagini will consequently drain one Fatigue level of blood per 

small stature means they can easily hide and in woodland or under- 
minute thereafter, whilst simultaneously sustaining her coupling. A 

growth are very difficult to spot. It is possible that bakru have some 
bagini prefers the throat for its bite so that it can apply pressure to 

relationship with elves, and some species may even originate from 
the windpipe of the victim, preventing them from calling out. 

Taerie. 
If the bite latches on, the victim must win in an opposed Brawn 

Bakru are intensely magical and use their magic to cause mis- 
roll to prise the creature off. Failure means they are pinned under 

chief and havoc for mortals. Any bakru has a number of Folk Magic 
the creature’s weight, and subject to the Grip special effect. Fur- 

spells equal to its POW, and a number of Theism spells equal to half 
ther efforts can be made to break free, but each subsequent attempt 

its CHA. Games Masters will need to decide precisely what spells 
incurs an additional grade of difficulty. Bagini only use their claws 

are possessed but generally anything that can be used to play pranks, 
in self defence to drive off interlopers which disturb their feeding. 

cause annoyance or interfere are appropriate. 
This version of the bagini is based on Australian aboriginal 

These imps cannot be harmed by mundane weapons. However, 
myth. Yet many cultures describe similar creatures, and there is no 

magical weapons of any kind inflict normal damage. Killing them is 
reason why bagini cannot have more exotic animal types: cat, lizard, 

said to bring extremely bad luck in the form of a curse. To simulate 
or even aquatic species such as dolphin or shark. The latter creates a 

this, Games Masters may wish to inflict some form of poor luck on 
rather memorable variation on the mermaid legend. 

any character who kills a bakru, whether accidentally or deliberately. 
Roll on the accompanying tables to determine the effect and dura- 

Bagini Attributes 
tion of the curse. 

STR: 2d6+12 (19) Action Points 3 

BakkrruuU CUuRrSsEe TYyPpEe 
CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier +1d4 

1d6  Curse Type 
SIZ: 2d6+6 (13) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 3d6+6 (17) Movement 8m The character’s chance to fumble becomes a roll of 90-00 
1 

instead of 99-00 for the duration of the curse. 
INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 15 

All skills become one grade more difficult for the duration of the 
POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Fur 2 

curse. 
CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Life Sense, Night Sight, 

3 The character completely forgets one Professional skill for the 
Vampiric 

duration of the curse. 
Magic Tolk Magic 62% (Glamour, 

4 The character is subject to at least one level of fatigue for the 
Sleep) 

curse’s duration. 

1d20 Location AP/HP 5 The character develops a powerfully repellent odour resulting in 

1-3 Right Leg 1/5 banishment from public places for the curse’s duration. 

4-6 Left Leg 1/5 All harmful or manipulative spells directed by the character at an 

7-9 Abdomen 1/6 opponent affect himself instead, for the curse’s duration. 

10-12 Chest 1/7 
BakkrruuU CUuRrssEe TYyPpEe 

13-15 Right Arm 1/4 
1d6  Duration 

16-18 Left Arm 1/4 
1 1d6 Combat Rounds 

19-20 Head 1/5 
2 1d6 Minutes 

Skills 3 1d6 Hours 

Athletics 56%, Brawn 72%, Endurance 56%, Evade 64%, Influence 62%, 4 1d6 Days 

Perception 54%, Seduction 64%, Stealth 50%, Willpower 62% 5 1d6 Months 

6 1d6 Years 
Passions 

Insatiable Hunger 80%, Love Sex 80%, Hate Mortals 75% 
Alleviating the curse requires some form of propitiation to the 

god who created the bakru, if at all possible. Otherwise, some other 
Combat Style & Weapons 

form of magical healing or alleviation may be necessary, but in such 
Ferocious Fracas (Bite, Fist, Thrown Object) 67% 

228



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

circumstances the Magnitude of the curse is equal to the POW of 
the dead Bakru. 

In those campaigns based on high fantasy, or using the realm of 
Faerie, bakru are a naturally occurring species. Mischevious, some- 
times malevolent, and always a nuisance when they decide to target 
some hapless human (such as cobblers, peddlers, and the like) who 
have caused them some slight... 

Bakru Attributes 

STR: 1d3 (2) Action Points 3 

CON: 1d6+1 (5) Damage Modifier -1d8 

SIZ: 1d3 (2) Magic Points 17 

DEX: 3d6+6 (17) Movement 6m 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 15 

POW: 3d6+6 (17) Armour Wooden Skin 

CHA: 2d6+6 (13) Abilities Immunity (Mundane 

Weapons) 

Magic Tolk Magic 70%, Devotion 

60%, Exhort 66% 

1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Right Leg 1/2 

46 Left Leg 1/2 

7-9 Abdomen 1/3 

10-12 Chest 1/4 

13-15 Right Arm 1/1 

16-18 Left Arm 1/1 power. This forces an opposed roll of the basilisk’s Willpower against 
19-20 Head 1/2 the victim’s Evade (to avert their eyes in time). If the victim loses he 

suffers an immediate Major Wound to the Head, haemorrhaging 
blood from the eyes, ears, nostrils and mouth. A further standard 

Acrobatics 59%, Athletics 49%, Brawn 24%, Deceit 66%, Endurance 30%, Evade Endurance roll is needed on the next round to avoid death. The 
74%, Locale 66%, Perception 70%, Sleight 70%, Stealth 70%, Willpower 74% Death Gaze is also effective against plant-life, causing all but the 

hardiest plants to wither and die against the monster’s evil glare. 
Passions Cluriously, these beasts are not immune to their own gaze; if 
Make Mischief 88%, Take Offence 75% forced to glimpse its own reflection, it must succeed in a Willpower 

roll or die on the spot. 
Combat Style & Weapons Basilisks and cockatrices have little need to enter into physical 
None combat, relying on their gaze and Evade for defence. If injured 

the monster’s acidic blood immediately inflicts 1d6 damage to the 
weapon used (armour points do not protect), with the acid continu- 
ing to inflict damage each round for the next two rounds. 

BAassilLiisskk//CCoOCcKkAaTtRrIicCEe Cluriously, weasels and similar mammals, such as ferrets and the 

A curious— and deadly — combination of rooster and serpent, mongoose, are immune the gaze of the basilisk; their blood, spit and 

basilisks and cockatrice (the former is hatched from the egg of a urine contains a venom wholly poisonous to the monster meaning 

cockerel by a serpent, and the latter from the egg of a serpent by a that such animals are safe from any of the basilisk’s attacks. Sim- 

cockerel) are small but dreadful magical creatures. Being innately ilarly, if a basilisk hears a cock crowing at dawn, it must make an 

evil they detest all life, and deal with it by the glare which is enough immediate Willpower roll or die immediately, meaning that most 

to kill anyone who meets the baleful gaze. basilisks and cockatrice are found far from human habitation. 

Either creature is about the size of a large rooster with a ser- Certain sorcerers believe that a basilisk can be tamed if raised 

pentine body, sometimes with small, useless dragon-like wings, a from the egg by a human parent and will not turn their dreadful 

rooster’s head and wattle, and usually two or occasionally four, roost- gaze against their owner. It takes a brave sorcerer to attempt such 

er-like feet. They are highly, highly reclusive, and often prized by husbandry, and braver adventurers to go hunting basilisk eggs, but 

sorcerers for many bodily components that are useful ingredients in given the highly magical and lethal nature of the monster, the risks 

rituals and spells. The blood of the basilisk is a concentrated acid but may well be thought to be worthwhile. 

its real power lies in its Death Stare. The basilisk must expend both a 
Magic Point and an Action Point on its turn to activate this dreadful 

229



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Basilisk/ Cockatrice Attributes Bear Attributes 

STR: 1d6+1 (5) Action Points 2 STR: 2d6+18 (25) Action Points 3 

CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier -1d6 CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier +1d12 

SIZ: 1d6+1 (5) Magic Points 19 SIZ: 4d6+20 (34) Magic Points 7 

DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 6m DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 8m 

INS: 2d6+4 (11) Initiative Bonus 12 INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 13 

POW: 2d6+12 (19) Armour Scales POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Thick Pelt 

Abilities Gaze Attack, Life Sense, Abilities Intimidate, Nightsight 

Terrifying 
Magic None 

Magic None 

1d20 Location AP/HP 
1d20 Location API/HP 

1-3 Right Rear Leg 3/10 
1-3 Tail 1/4 

46 Left Rear Leg 3/10 
4-5 Right Hind Leg 1/4 

7-9 Hindquarters 3/11 
6-7 Left Hind Leg 1/4 

10-12 Forequarters 3/12 
8-10 Hindquarters 1/5 

13-15 Right Front Leg 3/10 
11-14 Forequarters 1/6 

16-18 Left Front Leg 3/10 
15-16 Right Winglet 1/3 

19-20 Head 3/10 
17-18 Left Winglet 1/3 

19-20 Head 1/4 

Athletics 68%, Brawn 79%, Endurance 66%, Evade 46%, Perception 60%, Stealth 

Skills 66%, Survival 60%, Swim 68%, Track 66%, Willpower 44% 

Athletics 48%, Brawn 30%, Endurance 52%, Evade 66%, Perception 69%, 

Willpower 78% Combat Style & Weapons 

Ursine Fury (Bite and Claws) 78% 

Combat Style & Weapons 
Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Gaze Attack (see description) 

Bite L S 1d8+1d12 As for Head 

Claw H L 1d8+1d12 As for Arm 
BEeaARr 

Bears typically inhabit forested and hilly regions in temperate 
to arctic zones. They are generally solitary animals although moth- BEeeeTtLlEe,, GGiIaAnNTt 
ers and cubs travel together in packs. The following characteristics Giant beetles come in many different species. All species are six- 

represent Grizzly, Kodiak and Polar bears. These are the largest, legged, and some have wings that fold into the carapace. All giant 

fiercest, and most unpredictable of the bear species although their beetles are naturally armoured with chitin across all surfaces save the 

need to attack is generally driven by hunger, curiosity and fear. They underbelly — natural protection against predators although, in their 

will roam far and wide in search of food, even entering settlements giant forms, only the very largest carnivores are a match for them. 

to scavenge, and prey on smaller creatures. They will pursue and Beetles are not necessarily aggressive. Many beetles are omnivo- 

track injured creatures, or those that flee, and leave a discernible rous, feeding on mouldering plant detritus and vegetation, and other 

trail. Like many predators, playing dead does confuse the bear, and invertebrates (and also small mammals). They prefer warm, dark 

cause it to lose interest which may prove to be a life-saver if attacked. conditions, and so are often found underground in their vast bur- 

Despite their size and bulk they are swift and remarkable swimmers rows — a few types are ground-dwellers rather than burrowers. 

and climbers. All giant beetles rely on their armour for defence rather than 

Bears typically attempt to grip with both claws, and then deliver evading. Grasping, and then attempting to dash their foes (or simply 

a bite, although swiping with a claw is also an effective means of continue biting) is a common enough tactic. 

disabling an enemy. Prehistoric ursoids, such as the short-faced bear, Some creatures, such as goblins, orcs, and even dwarves, actively 

tend to be larger and stronger (additional +6 STR, +10 SIZ). breed and farm giant beetles for use as beasts of burden and steeds. 

Playing dead is a tactic oft-cited for dealing with bear attacks. Species that fly are prized amongst those that put these massive 

This is fine if the bear is acting defensively. If hungry, and actively insects to work. 

chasing prey, playing dead may well be quite the wrong way to act. A 
hungry bear does not care if its meal is moving or static... BOoAaRr 

Wild boars inhabit woods and forests in most temperate climates. 
The body of the wild boar is compact; the head is large, whilst the 
legs relatively short. A boar’s coat consists of stiff bristles and finer 
fur. The colour varies from dark grey to black or brown, are there 

230



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Beetle, Giant Attributes 

STR: 2d6+12 (19) Action Points 

CON: 3d6+6 (17) Damage Modifier +1d6 

SIZ: 2d6+12 (19) Magic Points 4 

DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 12m 

INS: 2d6+2 (9) Initiative Bonus 11 

POW: 1d6 (4) Armour Chitin 

Abilities Burrowing, Formidable 

Natural Weapons 

Magic None 

1d20 Location AP/HP 

1 Right Rear Leg 5/7 

2 Left Rear Leg 5/7 

3 Right Middle Leg 5/7 

4 Left Middle Leg 5/7 

59 Abdomen 5/9 

10-13 Thorax 5/10 

14 Right Front Leg 5/7 

15 Left Front Leg 5/7 

16-20 Head 5/8 

Skills 

Athletics 62%, Brawn 68%, Endurance 74%, Evade 26%, Perception 53%, 

Willpower 38% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Beetle Bite (Mandibles) 72% 

Size/Force Reach Damage 

Mandibles M T 1d6+1d6 As for Head 

can be great regional differences in colour. Adult boars measure 
around 2m in length, and stand around 1m at the shoulder. Larger 
specimens are not uncommon. Adult males are equipped with large, Attributes 

sharp tusks used for foraging and fighting, and these tusks lend the STR: 2d6+9 (16) Action Points 2 

boar its fearsome reputation. 
CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier +1d4 

Boars are usually solitary animals outside of the breeding sea- 
SIZ: 3d6+6 (17) Magic Points 7 

son. All boars are aggressive when threatened, usually attempting to 
DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 8m 

intimidate first, and then launch a powerful charge using the tusks 
to carve at their enemies. Sows with young will almost certainly INS: 2d6+4 (1) Initiative Bonus 11 

attempt to defend their progeny from potential attack, and males POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Bristled Hide 

can be highly territorial — especially if sows are nearby during the 
Abilities Burrower, Frenzy 

breeding season. 
Magic None 

The animals are prized for their rich meat, strong, warm hide, 

and their tusks which make excellent trophies. Boar hunting, using 
hounds to track and flush the animals, is a widespread sport through- 

1d20 Location AP/HP 
out most cultures, but a hazardous one. Large, powerful specimens 

Right Rear Leg 2/7 
can easily eviscerate unwary opponents, and whilst much of the 
challenge comes in facing these creatures with a long spear to receive Left Rear Leg 2/7 

a charge, hunter injuries and deaths are not uncommon. Hindquarters 2/8 

Some species, such as goblins and orcs, raise boar as mounts, Forequarters 2/9 

riding them into battle just as any other steed. A boar cavalry, tusks Right Front Leg 2/7 

tipped with iron or even spikes or spines, is a terrifying sight. Left Front Leg 2/7 

Head 2/7 

231

o 



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Skills 

Athletics 57%, Brawn 63%, Endurance 62%, Evade 42%, Perception 48%, Athletics 59%, Brawn 62%, Endurance 62%, Evade 56%, Locale 66%, Perception 

Willpower 32% 64%, Survival 67%, Unarmed 59%, 

Willpower 62% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Goring Grunter (Tusks) 67% Combat Style & Weapons 

Boar-Kin Warrior (Spear, Tusk, Shield) 69% 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Passions 
Tusks M S 1d6+1d4 As for Head 

Love Chaos 88%, Hate Intruders 80% 

BoAarr--KIinN Weapon Size /Force Reach Damage 

Boar-headed humans akin to minotaurs, boar-kin are a product Shortspear M L 1d8+1+1d4 4/5 

of the gods of chaos. Powerful, aggressive, forest-dwelling individu- 
Tusks M T 1d4+1d4 As for Head 

als, they are as attuned to their environment as are their four-legged 
relatives, and may even lead packs of wild boar acting as their lead- Peltast Shield L S 1d4+1d4 4/12 

ers. Boar-Kin are equipped with the ferocious tusks of their ani- 
mal cousins, and find socialization with humankind difficult. They 

BoNnAaCcoONn 
have simple psychologies: defend their territory and their lives, and 

This herbivorous four legged beast has the body of a bull and 
procreate their species. For this latter goal, humans may be actively 

the head of a horse, the head equipped with oversized sharp, curling 
stalked, seized, and kept prisoner deep in the boar-kin’s forest lair. 

horns. Bonacon can be tamed and used as mounts, but capturing 
Boar-Kin, like their four-legged brethren, are largely noctur- 

these beasts in the wild is hazardous as bonacon are naturally fierce 
nal. They are burrow dwellers (like their kin), and may have a large 

and antagonistic, taking exception to most intruders. If forced to 
underground lair consisting of a tunnels and chambers beneath the 

back down, the bonacon flees, expelling a trail of excrement behind 
forest floor. 

it which is spread by its revolving hairy tail. 
Boar-Kin, if needing a mate, will always try to incapacitate 

This strange behaviour has a second peculiarity. Its faeces are 
rather than kill so that a potential victim can be captured. Typically 

poisonous, a result of complex digestive processes that create a pun- 
boar-kin use their spears, relying only on tusks when in close prox- 

gent, agony and asphyxia-inducing residue inherent in its pellets. 
imity to their targets. If a boar-kin successfully gouges with its tusks 

Contact between bonacon faeces and exposed flesh results in, first, 
roll 1d10+10 for the Hit Location to reflect the upper parts of the 

itching and then an intense burning sensation. Shortness of breath 
body likely to be targeted by the attack. 

follows as the lungs begin to fail, and then the possibility of death as 
airways close. One pellet — about the size of a fist — can be used to 

Boar-Kin Attributes 
coat the blade of a Medium sized weapon to create a natural blade 

STR: 2d6+9 (16) Action Points 3 
venom. 

CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier — +1d4 

Bonacon Attributes 
SIZ: 2d6+9 (16) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 6m STR: 2d6+12(19) Action Points 2 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 13 CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 

SIZ: 4d6+12 (26) Magic Points 7 
POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Bristled Hide 

DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 10m 
CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities Burrower, Chaos Tainted (if 

INS: 2d6+4 (11) Initiative Bonus 12 
a product of Chaos), Frenzy, 

Intimidate POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Tough Hide 

Magic Tolk Magic 56% (Befuddle, Abilities Trample, Venomous (facces) 

Coordination, Firearrow) 
Magic None 

1d20 Location AP/HP 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Right Leg 1/7 
1-3 Right Rear Leg 2/9 

46 Left Leg 1/7 
4-6 Left Rear Leg 2/9 

79 Abdomen 1/8 
79 Hindquarters 2/10 

10-12 Chest 1/9 
10-12 Forequarters 2/11 

13-15 Right Arm 1/6 
13-15 Right Front Leg 2/9 

16-18 Left Arm 1/6 
16-18 Left Front Leg 2/9 

19-20 Head 1/7 
19-20 Head 2/9 

232



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Skills CEeNnTtaAuURr CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 
Athletics 62%, Brawn 65%, Endurance 62%, Evade 46%, Perception 38%, Centaurs can certainly be used as player characters although 

Willpower 34% their physiology and general nature may prove to be a challenge in 
some situations. 

Combat Style & Weapons CUuLlTtUuRrEe 
The Centaur culture is roughly equivalent to Barbarian, even 

Gore and Gouge (Horns) 72% 
though they do not build fixed settlements, and study many cerebral 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage arts. The herd is a cohesive social group with strong traditions and 

Horns M S 1d10+1d8 As for Head principles. Naturally herds display the same range of characteris- 
tics as any society and, although centaurs are, by and large, passive 

Trample H S 2d8 As for Leg 
there are herds that enjoy war, raiding and challenging those around 
them. Indeed, some of the examples found in the Combat chapter 

The facces of a bonacon have a Potency of 70 with itching 
show the more aggressive side to the centaur culture. 

beginning after 1d4 Combat Rounds. A further Endurance roll 
against the potency is required after one hour as the affected area & Customs+40%, Native Tongue+40% 
is subject to the Agony condition (see page 75). After another 1d3 & Standard Skills: Athletics, Brawn, Endurance, First Aid, 
hours a further Endurance roll, this time at one grade lower, must Insight, Locale, Perception 
be made to avoid incurring 1d3 levels of Fatigue owing to shortness & Example Combat Styles: Centaur Warrior, Centaur Berserker 
of breath. 1d3 hours later the airways start to fail resulting in death & Professional Skills: Courtesy, Craft (any), Healing, Language 
in CON minutes if some form of poison cure cannot be found. If at (any), Lore (any), Musicianship, Teach, Track 
any stage the victim succeeds in resisting the poison then all further 
effects are ignored. 

Minotaurs (see page 258) are immune to the bonacon’s toxic 
faeces. Some tribes herd bonacon and collect the excrement to be 
used as ammunition for slings or simply to hurl at those who have 
displeased them. 

CEeNnTtaAuURr 
The classical centaur is a magical cross between human 

and equine forms: the upper body of a human replacing the 
horse’s head and neck. However other centaur forms are pos- 
sible: elf; goblin or orc centaurs, for instance. 

Centaurs are noted for their intelligence, and often act 
as teachers, and tutors. They are social and herds of 
centaurs form their own societies based on either a 
barbarian or nomadic culture rather than a civilised 
one — although centaurs display many cultural 
qualities equating to civilised societies, they can 
also become wild and bestial, especially when 
drunk. 

It is common for centaurs to form friendship 
bonds with an individual or a group of individuals, 
but their loyalties will always be, first and foremost, 
to their own herd. Centaurs mate with their own 
kind and cannot mate with humans, but they have 
human emotions, and so romantic liaisons are not 
unknown. 

Centaurs can study and practice magic just as 
humans can. Any magical style is open to them, and 
the style favoured depends entirely on the social, 
cultural and religious practices of the centaur herd. 

Note: The centaur’s anatomy means that the 
Damage Modifier and Hit Points for its upper half 
are figured using STR x2 and CON x2. 

233



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy 
Centaur Attributes 

Centaur characters begin the game with goods and currency 
STR: 3d6+6 (17) Action Points 2 

worth 4d6 x60 silver pieces. 
CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier ~ +1d4 (+1d10 when 

Trampling) ThHe CEeNnTtaAuURr VOoIiCcEe 
SIZ: 3d6+18 (29) Magic Points 16 ‘Our herd rules these pastures butyou arefree to pass through as long as you 
DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 12m do not approach our mares andf oals, and remember that honour should prevail. 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 12 Indeed, we know many from your city, and I had the privilege of acting as tutor 
lo one ofy our noblemen: perhapsyou have heard of am? No? Ah, well... not all 

POW: 2d6+9 (16) Armour Hide on equine parts. Any 
are destinedfor great things. 

armour for their human 
We are cautious because there have been raids by the two-legged beastmen 

locations and barding for the 

equine locations. of Chaos recently. Only last season our warriors had to drive-away a raiding 
party intent on spreading disease. One of our mares was captured a year ago and 

CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Trample 
Joaled a terrible monstrosity so it is our duty to wipe out their pestilence. We will 

Magic Specialists may follow any 
keep them from reaching your city if we can — even if that costs centaur lves. 

magical tradition. 
We fear chaos but will stand against it because purily requires a_fight if it is lo 
be preserved. 

1d20 Location AP/HP You look weary. My cave is notf ar;, and our herd is gathering to feast thus eve. 
1-3 Right Rear Leg 1/8 If you wish you may join us, rest, and eat. There will be many stories told, and 
4-6 Left Rear Leg 1/8 competitions held. Why, tf you can use that bow you carry you might even beat 
7-8 Hindquarters 1/9 some of our archers! If not, we can show you some techniques that will improve 

9-10 Forequarters 1/10 your skill with it. The choice ts yours. If you join us you will be most welcome, 

11-12 Right Front Leg 1/8 and on the morrow I will have two of our warriors provide a guide through the 
western hills, which is where the chaos nest lurks. 

13-14 Left Front Leg 1/8 
Pass in peace, two-legged brother” 

15-16 Chest 0/7 

17 Right Arm 0/4 

18 Left Arm 0/4 CHhAaOoSs HYyBbRrIidD 
19-20 Head 0/5 These foul beings go by many regional and cultural names 

but are essentially the same thing: a chaos-warped combination 
of human and animal (goat, sheep, and antelope) that frequently 
carries disease, and lives only to reproduce, spread its diseases, and 

Athletics 58%, Brawn 70%, Endurance 52%, Evade 62%, Insight 59%, Locale 
bring havoc and suffering to the untainted. 

66%, Lore (Various) 66%, Musicianship 62%, Perception 49%, Teach 64%, 
Chaos Hybrids have their own, loosely-knit, primitive cultures 

Unarmed 58%, Willpower 62% 
based on strength and cruelty. A leader of a pack (known as a Mur- 
der) is always the strongest, fiercest, and most ruthless of the bunch, 

Combat Style & Weapons 
having secured his place through slaughtering any challengers. 

Centaur Warrior (Spear, Shield, Short Bow) 68% 
Given this mind-set and philosophy it is therefore unsurprising to 
find that Chaos Hybrids have utter contempt for all other sapient 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 
races seeing them as prey, a means to spread their contagion and to 

Shortspear M L 1d8+1+1d4 4/5 breed with. 

Peltast Shield L S 1d4+1d4 4/12 The creatures worship the gods associated with their atrocities: 
those of murder, chaos, disease and blight. Most other sapient cul- 

Short Bow L - 1d6+1d4 4/4 tures shun them at best, and hunt them down with a view to exter- 

Hooves L M 1d6+1d4 As for Leg mination at worst. 
Chaos Hybrids have a chance equal to their Willpower of being 

Trample H M 2d10 As for Leg 
cursed (or blessed) with 1d3 Chaotic Features. They are also adept 
magicians, and most Hybrids can be expected to have a number of 

CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 
Folk Magic spells equal to their CHA. Each pack has at least one 

& Loyalty to Herd priest or shaman with access to the relevant magic. 

& Love (Person, Alcohol, Learning, Women) Note that some hybrids are born with sub-sapient intellects which 

& Hate (Ignorance, Predators, and so on). may cause them to act as little more than mentally impaired beasts. 
A Chaos Hybrid carries a disease (see the disease table below) 

which can be caught through close proximity to the creature (i.e., 
PRrOoFfEeSsSsIioOnNSs 

close combat engagement distances). Chaos Hybrid corpses remain 
Craftsman, Herder, Hunter, Physician, Priest, Scholar, Scout, 

contagious unless burned. The potency of the disease is always 
Shaman, Warrior 

equal to the Chaos Hybrid’s Endurance. 
The diseases in the tableare the most common, but Chaos 

Hybrids have many dreadful contagions, especially those who 

234



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Passions 

Love Chaos 88%, Hate Everyone 80% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Hybrid Ravager (Spear, Club, Shield) 64% 

Weapon Size/ Force Reach Damage 

Club M S 1d6+1d2 4/4 

Shortspear M L 1d8+1+1d2 4/5 

Horns M S 1d4+1d2 As for Head 

Target Shield M S 1d4+1d2 4/9 

CHhAaOoss HYyBbRrIidD DIiSsEeAaSsEeSs 

1d6 Disease Symptoms and Effects 

1 point of INT is lost every week until the 

disease is cured. The victim feels sleepy and 
Mind Rot 

indolent, the condition worsening with each 

point of INT lost. 

Suppurating boils begin in a random 

location and spread to an adjacent location 

each week until cured. The boils hiss and 
burst easily leaving horrible welts in their 

Seeping Pox wake. The affected location cannot be 
covered whilst afflicted and sustains 1 Hit 

worship the spirits and gods of disease. Hybrid shaman go out of Point of damage after infection. 1d3 points 

their way to locate virulent disease spirits in the Spirit World, bring- of CHA is lost when the disease reaches the 
Head. 

ing them back to deliberately infect an entire tribe. 
The victim is wracked by shivers that 

Chaos Hybrid Attributes no degree of heat can alleviate. He 
Creeping Chills 

STR: 2d6+6 (13) Action Points 2 automatically gains 1d3 levels of Fatigue 

which remains until the disease is cured. 
CON: 1d6+12 (16) Damage Modifier ~ +1d2 

Whenever strenuous activity is entered the 
SIZ: 2d6+6 (13) Magic Points 11 

victim must make an Endurance roll. If 
DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 8m 

failed he is subjected to a fit of dreadful, 
INT: 3d6 (11) Initiative Bonus 11 Gagging Cough 

painful coughing that continues for 1d6 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Tough Hide minutes. During this time he is unable to do 
anything save cough and wretch. 

CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities Chaos Tainted, Disease 

Immunity The victim breaks out in a scarlet rash that 

covers the entire body. 1 point of CON is 
Magic Tolk Magic 48%; Specialists 

have either Devotion 58% & Red Plague lost every day through vomiting, diarrhoea 

Exhort 58%, or Binding 58% and dehydration. When CON reaches zero 

& Trance 57% the victim dies. 

The victim is subject to violent headaches 

1d20 Location AP/HP and suffers mild hallucinations whenever 

they make a skill check which results in a 
1-3 Right Leg 1/7 

roll of 96+. However, he also descends into 
4-6 Left Leg 1/7 Madness Blight 

insanity becoming paranoid, schizophrenic, 
79 Abdomen 1/8 subject to violent rages and, after a number 
10-12 Chest 1/9 of days equal to his POW, irreparably 

13-15 Right Arm 1/6 insane. 

16-18 Left Arm 1/6 

19-20 Head 1/7 

Skills 

Athletics 44%, Brawn 46%, Endurance 62%, Evade 42%, Locale 52%, Perception 

62%, Survival 67%, Unarmed 54%, Willpower 52% 

235



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

CHhIimMEeRraA Combat Style & Weapons 

The Chimera of mythology has the head and body of a lion Chimeric Chaos (Serpent Head, Goat Head, Lion Head, Claws) 75% 

(or lioness) with a serpent for a tail, and the head of a goat emerg- 
Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

ing from the mid-part of the beast’s spine. The serpent is poisonous 
(treat as cobra venom on page 76), and the goat can breathe fire, Serpent Tail M L 1d4+Poison As for Tail 

whilst the lion’s head snarls and rages. Clearly a product of magic 
Goat Head L L 1d10+Fire As for Head 

and perhaps Chaos, the chimera is a fearsome monster able to han- 
dle multiple foes simultancously. The breath weapon of the goat’s Lion Head L T 1d6+1d* As for Head 

head makes it difficult to get close to the creature, and only magical Claws L M 1d6+1d8 As for Leg 

or enchanted weapons inflict normal damage. 
Chimera are generally encountered singly, and as guardians of 

some kind — although some individuals may wander, bringing fear CrrAaBb,, GIiaAnNTt 
and destruction to those areas they decide to stalk. They are pos- Gigantic versions of the familiar marine crustaceans, these crabs 

sessed of a ravenous hunger, devouring any fresh meat that happens can be found in both oceanic and land-based variants although, in 

across their path. In some myth variants the chimera is depicted as the latter case, large bodies of nearby water are favoured. 

having the head of a fire-breathing lion with the horns of a goat. If Giant crabs are capable of burrowing although they tend to 

using such a variation, then remember that the horns can be used as remain close to the surface rather than creating deep and lengthy 

a highly effective impaling weapon. excavations. 

Killing a chimera can be achieved through decapitating the lion All crabs benefit from the natural armour of their carapace, 

head; killing the serpent or goat heads only serves to deprive the but the giant species of the familiar crustacean takes exceptional 

monster of those attacks. The creature can split its attacks easily advantage. They possess one oversized claw which grants them a 

against separate enemies, assuming they are within range. distinctive appearance. The giant crab behaves in very much the 
same way as its smaller cousins, with its sideways scuttle, and its 
aquatic life style (although land crabs can also be encountered in 
jungle environments). 

Chimera Attributes 
Giant crabs are able to parry with either claw making them for- 

STR: 2d6+12 (19) Action Points 5 (multiheaded) 
midable opponents in combat. Both claws are able to Grip and Sun- 

CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 der. The secondary claw is usually used for parrying blows whilst the 
SIZ: 2d6+18 (25) Magic Points 13 main claw is used to deliver them. 
DEX: 2d6+9 (16) Movement 10m 

INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 15 Crab, Giant Attributes 

STR: 2d6+12(19) Action Points 3 
POW: 2d6+6 (13) Armour Mane and Hide 

CON: 3d6+6 (17) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 
Abilities Breathe Flame, Immunity 

(Mundane weapons), Multi- SIZ: 4d6+12 (26) Magic Points 4 

headed, Venomous DEX: 3d6+6 (17) Movement 6m 

Magic None INS: 2d6+2 (9) Initiative Bonus 13 

POW: 1d6 (4) Armour Carapace 

1d20 Location API/HP 
Abilities Burrowing, Formidable 

1-2 Serpent Tail 1/7 Natural Weapons 

3-4 Right Rear Leg 1/8 Magic None 

5-6 Left Rear Leg 1/8 

7-8 Hindquarters 1/9 1d20 Location AP/HP 

9-10 Goat Head 1/8 1 Right Fourth Leg 8/8 

11-14 Forequarters 1/10 2 Left Fourth Leg 8/8 

15-16 Right Front Leg 1/8 3 Right Third Leg 8/8 

17-18 Left Front Leg 1/8 4 Left Third Leg 8/8 

19-20 Lion Head 2/8 5 Right Second Leg 8/8 

6 Left Second Leg 8/8 

7 Right First Leg 8/8 

8 Left First Leg 8/8 
Athletics 55%, Brawn 68%, Endurance 66%, Evade 62%, Perception 56%, 

Willpower 66% 9-10 Abdomen 8/10 

11-16 Cephalothorax 8/11 

17-18 Right Pincer 8/11 

19-20 Left Pincer 8/9 

236



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Skills 

Athletics 56%, Brawn 75%, Endurance 64%, Evade 54%, Perception 43%, Athletics 47%, Brawn 99%, Endurance 78%, Evade 32%, Perception 49%, Swim 

Willpower 38% 80% Willpower 44% 

Combat Style & Weapons Combat Style & Weapons 

Crushing Crustacean (Pincers) 76% Lurking Death (Jaws, Tail Sweep) 67% 

Weapon Size/ Force Reach Damage Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

As for Righ 
Primary Pincer H L 1d8+1d8 s or g ¢ Jaws H M 1d10+2d6 As for Head 

Pincer 

As for Left Tail H L 1d8+2d6 As for Tail 
Sccondary L M 1d8+1d8 
Pincer Pincer 

CycLlops 
CRrOoCcOoDdILilEe/ALlLlIigGaAtToOrR Greek legend refers to two quite distinct races bearing the same 

Crocodiles and alligators infest tropical and sub-tropical swamps name. For MyTHRas, Cyclopes are a race of single-eyed giants with 
and rivers where they feed on any form of live prey. Their camou- a taste for flesh of any kind, and a natural skill for metallurgy and 
flage is perfect for their environment, and by remaining perfectly constructing fortifications. 
still under the surface of murky water the creature can easily go The single eye of the Cyclops is found in the centre of the crea- 
unnoticed. They have little problem tackling prey much larger than ture’s forehead, above the hooked nose. Above the eye is a horn 
themselves using ambush tactics to lunge out from cover, seize the which is the source of magical power for the Cyclops. A typical 
prey, drag it into the water, then drown it. Despite their size and Clyclops stands around three times the height of a man. Its lower 
bulk, crocodiles are surprisingly fast and agile, albeit only maintain- body is goat-like, and covered in rough, shaggy wool terminating in 
ing this for short periods. cloven hoofs. 

Crocodiles always choose Grip when a Special Effect has been Cyclopes live in isolated areas where they herd livestock (which 
generated, and hold on for as long as possible, using Brawn and Ath- are eaten raw), and manufacture metal goods in their subterranean 
letics to take the prey into the water where it is submerged and held forges often located in volcanoes or in caves near the sea. These 
there, with the creature spinning around and around to facilitate goods are sold to those who manage to establish a relationship with 
both drowning and damage. Spinning does not inflict any additional the creatures, and Cyclopes are capable of forging exquisite weap- 
damage, butit makes attempts to break free from the grip two grades ons, armour, tools and jewellery. 
more difficult. Whilst submerged victims are subject to the Drown- A surly and bad tempered race, Cyclopes are quick to anger, 
ing rules (see page 71). and even those who have formed something 

Prehistoric crocodiles can grow far, far larger. 'To represent some- approaching a friendship 
thing like a Deinosuchus add +12 to STR, +24 to SIZ and double have been attacked 
its Armour Points. with  huge rocks, 

tree-trunk clubs or 
Crocodile/Alligator Attributes the forging ham- 
STR: 2d6+24 (31) Action Points 3 mers the Cyclo- 

CON: 2d6+12 (19) Damage Modifier ~ +2d6 pes  occasionally 

SIZ: 4d6+24 (38) Magic Points 7 carry. The most 
J unfortunate— and 

DEX: 2d6+9 (16) Movement 6m 
j this includes any- 

INS: 2d6+5 (12) Initiative Bonus 13 
, one who steal their 

POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Thick Scales livestock — are eaten. 

Abilities Camouflaged, Cold Blooded They are prone to 
throwing 

Magic None 

1d20 Location API/HP 

1-3 Tail 5/12 

4-5 Right Hind Leg 5/12 

6-7 Left Hind Leg 5/12 

8-10 Hindquarters 5/13 

11-14 Torequarters 5/14 

15-16 Right Front Leg 5/12 

17-18 Left Front Leg 5/12 

19-20 Head 5/13 

237



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

boulders at tresspassers or even passing ships using their Athletics to 
DRraRAgGoOnN 

aim the huge rocks. 
The most iconic, dreaded, and revered of legendary creatures, 

Ciyclopes are capable of using Folk Magic, and the horn above 
dragons are immense, winged, fire-breathing reptiles of great intel- 

their single eye acts as a Folk Magic focus. If taken from a freshly 
ligence — and, sometimes, wisdom — which are found represented 

killed Cyclops it contains the remaining Magic Points of the living 
in most cultures and mythologies. Sometimes they are brute killers, 

creature, which can be used to power Folk Magic spells cast by the 
preying on the helpless; sometimes they are solitary hoarders guard- 

owner. The capacity of the horn deteriorates over time — one Magic 
ing huge stashes of treasure; and at other times are wise mystics 

Point is lost every year until the horn becomes useless — but until 
that seem capable of guiding others as well as preying upon them. 

then, the Magic Points contained in the horn replenish at the same 
Dragons are fully sapient although their intelligence is fundamen- 

rate as its owner. 
tally alien to human psychology meaning that their actions, whilst 

If a Cyclops is hit in the head, no matter how much damage is 
appearing bestial, are driven by their own, peculiar, motivations and 

sustained, it must make an Endurance roll opposed by the attacker’s 
desires. 

combat roll. If the Cyclops fails in the roll it has been struck in the 
Dragons can talk. They have their own language (Draconic), 

eye, and all physical skills immediately become one grade harder. If 
and may be capable of either speaking other languages or converse 

it loses with a FFumble, it is rendered completely blind with all skills 
mentally, bypassing the need for individual languages. However 

becoming three grades harder. 
they communicate their dominating personality constantly seeks to 
ensnare or trick those that listen to its seductive words. They are 

Cyclops Attributes also capable of using magic: Tolk Magic certainly, and possibly 
STR: 2d6+24 (31) Action Points 2 higher forms such as sorcery. The choice of magic any dragon uses 
CON: 2d6+18 (25) Damage Modifier ~ +2d6 is dependent on the campaign, and the way the dragon is used. 

SIZ: 4d6+24 (38) Magic Points 13 Essentially solitary beings, dragons do mate and produce eggs, 

DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 10m which are closely and severely guarded. Reproducing is likely a long 
and difficult business given the relative rarity of these beasts. Usu- 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 12 
ally though, dragons are encountered as individuals, and extremely 

POW: 2d6+6 (13) Armour Skin & Fur (lower body) 
potent, dangerous at ones at that. A mature or old dragon is capa- 

CHA: 1d6 (4) Abilities Immunity (Fire) ble of handling scores of foes single-handedly although, as with any 

Magic Tolk Magic 65% (Bludgeon, creature, they do have their weaknesses, and may be prone to a lucky 

Iron Hand) strike that brings them crashing down. 
The dragon characteristics provided here are for a young beast, 

1d20 Location API/HP and one that uses Folk Magic to augment its natural capabilities. 

1-3 Right Leg 4/13 Older specimens should have their skills, physical characteristics, 
and natural protection augmented to reflect increasing age and 

4-6 Left Leg 4/13 
experience. Also note that this is a classic western dragon. Drag- 

7-9 Abdomen 4/14 
ons found in eastern mythologies often lack wings (yet still fly), are 

10-12 Chest 2/15 
more serpentine in appearance, and frequently have leonine features 

13-15 Right Arm 2/12 rather than reptilian. The same statistics can be used, but different 
16-18 Left Arm 2/12 Hit Locations may be required. 
19-20 Head 2/13 A dragon’s tail sweep can hit multiple foes, its Attack roll being 

simultaneously applied to everyone within reach on its rear or flank. 
Skills The fire breathed by a dragon stretches in a cone for a number 

Athletics 62%, Brawn 109%, Craft (Smithing) 64%, Endurance 80%, Evade 42%, of metres in length equal to the dragon’s CON, and a number of 

Locale 56%, Lore (Husbandry) 66%, Perception 56%, Unarmed 72%, Willpower metres wide equal to a quarter of CON. Anything caught in the 

66% blast ignites if flammable, and the heat is powerful enough to melt 
unenchanted metals. Repeatedly using the breath weapon within a 

Passions short period is exhausting though. If breathing fire more than once 
Resent Intruders 80%, Love Treasure and Metalwork 85% an hour, the dragon must make an Endurance roll with each roll 

after the first becoming one grade harder. Failing the Endurance roll 
Combat Style & Weapons gives the dragon one level of fatigue. Dragons therefore reserve their 
Huge Blunt Object (Hammer, Club) 82% fire for only those occasions where it is absolutely necessary. 

The classic dragon covets wealth, collecting and hoarding it in 
Weapon Size/ Force Reach Damage 

underground lairs and caverns. Not all dragons are so avaricious, 
Torge Hammer E VL 1d10+3+2d6 6/325 but there is no doubting their love for gold, jewels, and finely made 

things. They can be arrogant and vain, too, displaying obvious con- 
Immense Club C U 2d8+2d6 4/270 

tempt for anything smaller, less long-lived, and less intelligent. As 
Thrown Boulder E - 4d6 4/- with any intelligent creature though, dragons exhibit ahuge range of 

Stomp H L 1d8+2d6 As for Leg personality types and, despite their great power, many are friendly 
- or, at least not prone to violence - towards humans and other such 
species. 

238



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Dragg on Attributes DWwwAaRrFf 
STR: 2d6+24 (31) Action Points 4 Diminutive, subterranean humanoids that often have a propen- 

CON: 2d6+24 (31) Damage Modifier ~ +2d8 sity for mining and metallurgy, with an accompanying love for trea- 

SIZ: 4d6+36 (50) Magic Points 19 sure, and all things material. The classic view of dwarves is that 
of a stocky, bearded, gruft species that have no love for elves, and 

DEX: 2d6+12(19) Movement 12m, 18m (Flying) 
are often portrayed as greedy, calculating and mischievous. That 

INT: 2d6+12 (19) Initiative Bonus 19 
dwarves are short is a given, but most cultures and mythologies have 

POW: 2d6+12 (19) Armour Thick Scales a diminutive species of some kind, and the more materialistic side of 
CHA: 2d6+12 (19) Abilities Breathe Flame, Cold their nature is not ubiquitous. 

Blooded, Dark Sight, Diving Some dwarves are attuned with nature and earth in similar ways 
Strike, Engulfing, Flying, that elves are with the forests. It is probably fair to say that, just 
Formidable Natural Weapons, like humans, there are numerous dwarven races, all related, with a 
Immunity (Fire), Terrifying, myriad of different cultures. The things they have in common are 
Trample a squat, heavily-set stature, a preference for an underground exis- 

Magic: Folk Magic 78% (Avert, Befuddle, Cleanse, Coordination, Curse, tence, and certain natural enemies (subterranean predators such as 
Fangsharp, Find Treasure, Glamour, Heal, Mindspeech, Spiritshield, Vigour, trolls, for example). Beyond that, cultural dynamics are as diverse as 
Witchsight) human societies, although clearly adapted to a life in the tunnels and 

caverns, and where the natural hazards are very different to those 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

above ground. 
1-2 Tail 8/17 Dwarves are naturally suspicious of anyone espousing a different 
3-4 Right Hind Leg 8/17 way of life to their own, but not necessarily antagonistic towards 
5-6 Left Hind Leg 8/17 them. Living underground means learning to deal with rocks and 

7-8 Hindquarters 8/18 minerals which results in a capability for mining and metallurgy, but 

910 Right Wing 8/16 
11-12 Left Wing 8/16 

13-14 Forequarters 8/19 

15-16 Right Front Leg 8/17 

17-18 Left Front Leg 8/17 

19-20 Head 8/17 

Skills 

Athletics 80%, Brawn 120%, Deceit 78%, Endurance 

92%, Evade 68%, Fly 90%, Insight 78%, Locale 68%, 

Lore (Dragon) 68%, Perception 78%, Teach 58%, 

Willpower 78% 

Passions 

Covet Treasure 99%, Disdain Lesser Creatures 90%, 

Abhor Weakness 80%, Love Intrigues 84% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Death and Destruction (Bite, Claws, Tail Sweep) 90%, 

Flame Breath 80% 

Weapon  Size/Force Reach Damag 

Bite E L 1d12+2d8 As for Head 

Claws E L 1d10+2d8 As for Leg 

Tail E VL 1d10+2d8 As for Tail 

Flame . 
Breath Special 4d6 - 

Trample C T 4d8 - 



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

this is by no means a ubiquitous practice. However, given such an CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSssIioOnNSs 
insular environment most dwarves are wary, reticent, and probably 
suspicious where outsiders are concerned. & Loyalty to Clan 

Strong sunlight is not something they are used to, and many & Love (Something Materialistic) 

dwarves find that bright, natural light makes them feel sluggish and & Hate (Either Trolls, Elves or some other race that bears your 

fatigued. They are, though, generally resilient to cold temperatures, clan enmity) 

and can function with greater ease in the dark, winter months than 
in the warm, summer ones. 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsIioOnNSs 
The characteristics given here are for a typical dwarf from west- Alchemist, Crafter, Entertainer, Herder, Merchant, Miner, Offi- 

ern (and more specifically, Norse) myth. They are base characteris- cial, Physician, Priest, Scholar, Scout, Sorcerer, Thief, Warrior 
tics, and standard for all dwarf species but cultures and, therefore, 
skills and magic availability will vary. Whether or not dwarves have STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy 
beards, even females, is entirely up to you. Dwarven characters begin the game with commodities or cur- 

rency worth 4d6 x100 silver pieces. 
DWwAaRrVvEeNn CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

Dwarves make for good player characters. Their psychology is, ThHEe DWwAaRrVvEeNn VOoIiCcEe 
though, shaped by their environment and their physical capabilities. ‘Of rock and stone we shape the world. Of metal and gem we bend our tools. 
As indicated there are myriad species. The notes here are to help Above us the world turns, and moves from dark to light but here in the Halls 
design a typical dwarf from northern European mythology. all things stay the same, and that s how they should be. Change is unwanted 

because it brings uncertainty. Uncertainty breeds indecision, and indecision breeds 
CUuLlTtUuRrEe weakness. We dwarves are not weak. We know what to do, when to do 1, how o 

Dwarves are social creatures bonded into clans and tribes that do it, and the tools to do it with. If something needs doing we do it now. Canyou 
share the great underground halls and cities. In this respect they plough a field at might? Can you plant crops in rain? No. The Upper World limits 
most closely resemble the Barbarian culture although there are cer- what you can do, and that is why we shun it. In our Halls, we dictate the 
tain key differences. First of all, gender does not matter in dwar- pace, and the pace is for the good of the Hall. That is the only way. 
ven society: males and females share duties and respon- Our hall s the grandest. The grandfathers of our clan carved 
sibilities equally. This includes child-rearing, manual ut_from the living stone a thousandy ears ago, and each 
labour, hunting, and war. Secondly dwarves tend generation has continued the carving. What was 
to downplay the individual in favour of the once a small settlement of fifly caverns us now 
society. Dwarves know that strength comes a large city of almost a thousand. Our halls 
from numbers, and that the wants and needs are above the silver mines, and so we guard 
of the individual are always outweighed by the treasures of the earth. Trolls try to break 
the many. They are, however, collectively, through now and then, and we fight them 
an acquisitive, materialistic society, jealously with hammer, axe, and spear. They would 
guarding their discoveries and achievements. plunge us into their darkness, and eat our 
Dwarves like things and, when removed things — things we have strwved to mine and 
from the clan, a lone dwarf can become build. They shall not take us! 
selfish and individualistic very quickly, Likewise men come down 
because the overall dwarvish our passages seeking gold 
culture is absent to guide and ) and jewels. They have not 
control his baser instincts. ' the strength or wit to dig 

& Customs+40%, Native their own chambers, and so 

Tongue+40% take from ours. We fight them 

« Standard ~ Skill:  Athletics, Just like we fight the trolls. When the 

Brawn, Deceit, Endurance, First trolls and men fight, we dwarves laugh, and 

Aid, Locale, Perception Jeast because through killing each other they save 

& Example Combat Styles: Dwarven us the trouble. 

Thane, Dwarf Berserker, Mine Warrior We dwarves are as one. We are like the stone. 

& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft We are the stone.” 

(any), Engineering, Lore (any), Mecha- 
nisms, Musicianship, Oratory, Survival 

240



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

ELleEmMEeNnTtAaLl CHhAaRrAaCTcEtReIrSisTtIiCcSs aAnNDd ATtTtRrIibBUuTtEeSs 
Dwarf Attributes 

STR: 2d6+9 (16) Action Points 2 Cubic . 
STR DEX INS POW HP Protection 

Metres 
CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier ~ +1d2 

1 2d6+4 1d6+2 2d6+1 1d6+3 1d6+6 1 
SIZ: 1d3+9 (11)* Magic Points 11 

2 2d6+8 1d6+4 2d6+2 1d6+6 1d6+12 1 
DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 4m 

3 2d6+12 1d6+6 2d6+3 1d6+9 1d6+18 2 
INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 12 

4 2d6+16 1d6+8 2d6+4 1d6+12  1d6+24 2 
POW: 3d6 (11) Armour No Natural. Warriors favour 

5 2d6+20  1d6+10 2d6+5 1d6+15  1d6+30 3 
heavy armour 

6 2d6+24  1d6+12 2d6+6 1d6+18  1d6+36 3 
CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Earth Sense, Night Sight 

7 2d6+28  1d6+14 2d6+7 1d6+21 1d6+42 4 
Magic Tolk Magic 42% (Bludgeon, 

8 2d6+32  1d6+16 2d6+8 1d6+24  1d6+48 4 
Light, Lock, Might, Polish, 

9 2d6+36  1d6+18 2d6+9 1d6+27  1d6+54 5 
Repair). Specialists favour 

sorcery, but any magical path 10 2d6+40  1d6+20 2d6+10 1d6+30  1d6+60 5) 

is open to them. Fach 
. +1 per two 

additional +4 +2 +1 +3 +6 
steps 

1d20 Location API/HP metre 

1-3 Right Leg 0/6 large hot fires, and undines from water or any other liquid capable 
4-6 Left Leg 0/6 of supporting its fluid form. 

7-9 Abdomen 0/7 Elementals are most commonly encountered when summoned 

10-12 Chest 0/8 by a particular magician (whether animist, sorcerer or priest), and 
put into specific service. The magician must have a sufficient volume 

13-15 Right Arm 0/5 
of its base material in which to manifest it. For ease of reference, this 

16-18 Left Arm 0/5 
is measured in terms of cubic metres. As a rule of thumb, the larger 

19-20 Head 0/6 
the elemental the more potent it is. The elementals here are mod- 
erate examples. Far more powerful elemental entities exist: sylphs 

Skills that create hurricanes; vast undines that are incarnate tidal waves; 
Athletics 47%, Brawn 66%, Craft (Metallurgy) 64%, Craft (Masonry) 64%, salmanders that, when enraged, and in concert with the Earth God, 
Clustoms 76%, Deceit 54%, Endurance 72%, Evade 42%, Insight 44%, Locale create the pyroclastic flows of an erupting volcano. 
56%, Lore (Underground) 66%, Perception 54%, Survival 47%, Unarmed 57%, Elementals are naturally immune to magic that is based on their 
Willpower 42% 

particular element. Salamanders cannot be harmed by fire spells; 
sylphs are unaffected by magical winds, and so forth. Neither can 

Combat Style & Weapons 
they be injured by mundane weapons, as their physical forms merely 

Dwarven Warrior (Axe, Hammer, Shield, Crossbow) 67% replenish material from the immediate environment, but are dis- 
rupted by magical damage providing it is of another type than their 

Size/ Force Reach Damage 
own. 

Battleaxe M M 1d6+1+1d2 4/8 
Since elementals are amorphous they lack discrete locations. 

Great Hammer H L 1d10+3+1d2 4/10 Therefore all damage it suffers is taken from its pool of general Hit 
Points, and they are immune to serious or major wounds. However, 

Viking Shield L S 1d4+1d2 4/18 
once Hit Points are reduced to zero the spirit animating the elemen- 

Crosshbow H - 1d10 4/8 tal can no longer animate its body and dissipates. One does not ‘kill’ 
an elemental though; one merely disrupts its manifestation enough 

ELleEmMEeNnTtAaLlSs to cause it to return to wherever it was summoned from. 
The one weakness of an elemental is its vulnerability to the ele- 

Elementals are physical manifestations of semi-sapient supernat- 
ural entities, related to a particular classical element, which usually ment which opposes or dominates its own. These precise relation- 

inhabit the spirit realm. With the right magic they are capable of ships depend on the campaign world, but the upshot is that the ele- 

passing into the mundane world, and assuming a physical form con- mental takes double damage from magical attacks using the element 

sisting of the substance they represent. The following descriptions which is its antithesis. 

relate to the physical manifestations. For information about Elemen- All elementals possess the traits of Engulfing, Immunity (Own 

tal Spirits see page 148. Element), and Vulnerable (Counter-Element). Furthermore they 

The five elemental types are: Gnomes (earth), , Sylphs (air), Sala- share the same fundamental characteristics and attributes: 

manders (fire), Undines (water), and Shades (darkness). Hit Points are rolled rather than calculated. Only damage 

The physical nature, and therefore the characteristics, of each inflicted by magical spells or weapons affects the elemental, so a 

type, differ by the element it is comprised of. Gnomes are corporeal sword enhanced with a Bladesharp spell would harm the elemental, 

beings of gravel, mud or sand that can, nevertheless, merge with, and but not the damage bonus of its wielder. 

pass through the ground seamlessly. Sylphs are formed from blowing Protection represents the natural resilience of an elemental to 

winds, shades from stygian darkness and shadows, salamanders from magical damage. It acts just like Armour Points against any injury 
the elemental suffers. 

241



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

AVvEeRrAaGgEe ELleEmMEeNnTtAaLlSs 

Cubic Metre I\Tatural Weapon Act.ion Initiative APIHP Skills 
Size and Damage Points Bonus 

1 None 2 +7 1/10 Brawn 42%, Evade 52%, Perception 45%, Willpower 64%, Combat 57% 

2 M/1d2 2 +HY) 1/16 Brawn 50%, Evade 56%, Perception 49%, Willpower 70%, Combat 63% 

3 L/1d6 2 +10 2/22 Brawn 58%, Evade 60%, Perception 53%, Willpower 76%, Combat 69% 

4 L/1d10 2 +12 2/28 Brawn 66%, Evade 64%, Perception 57%, Willpower 82%, Combat 75% 

5 H/1d12 3 +13 3/34 Brawn 74%, Evade 68%, Perception 61%, Willpower 88%, Combat 81% 

6 H/2d6 3 +15 3/40 Brawn 82%, Evade 72%, Perception 65%, Willpower 94%, Combat 87% 

7 E/2d6 3 +16 4/46 Brawn 90%, Evade 76%, Perception 69%, Willpower 100%, Combat 93% 

8 C/1d8+1d6 3 +18 4/52 Brawn 98%, Evade 80%, Perception 73%, Willpower 106%, Combat 99% 

9 C/2d8 4 +19 5/58 Brawn 106%, Evade 84%, Perception 77%, Willpower 112%, Combat 105% 

10 C/1d10+1d8 4 2F 2l 5/64 Brawn 114%, Evade 88%, Perception 81%, Willpower 118%, Combat 111% 

An elementals’ Action Points and Initiative Bonus are calcu- inflict damage by bashing foes, throwing rocks or grinding 
lated normally. Its Damage Modifier however is based upon STR them into mince if they can engulf the victim within their 
x2, rather than STR + SIZ. To calculate its natural weapon gravelly mass. 
size substitute its STR for SIZ on the table on page 9. In & Salamanders manipulate fire, augmenting 
addition, elementals gain the following skills: Brawn (STR existing blazes, spreading and directing them. They 
x2)+20, Evade (DEX x2)+40, Perception (INS+POW)+30, produce heat and light, varying the temperature and 
Willpower (POW x2)+50, and Elemental Combat Style intensity as needed. Salamanders fight with lashing 
(STR+DEX)+40. whips of fire, shooting out jets of flame or by immo- 

Elementals injure or damage targets by lating victims directly by engulfing them. 
cither striking (pounding, throwing or & Shades are capable of concentrating 
blasting from afar) or by engulfing the darkness, manipulating shadows, and creat- 
victim entirely. Both methods require ing pockets of utter blackness even in broad 
a successful attack roll and inflict daylight. They frostburn opponents with 
the elementals’ Damage Bonus. their glacial touch or freeze them solid if 
Strikes may be parried if the target they can engulf them. 
is using a shield of sufficient size & Sylphs create breezes and 
with which to block the sub- winds, augment naturally occurring 
stance directed at it, and dam- air motion, deny air if necessary 
age is applied to only a single (or redirect it), and can lift objects 
location. into the air. They inflict damage 

Engulfing attacks however by tossing or tumbling foes, 
must be evaded, else the vic- blasting them with airborne 
tim suffer the rolled damage debris or if they can engulf the 
to every location simultane- victim, tearing them limb from 
ously. Furthermore, unless limb in a vicious cyclone. 
the engulfed victim can & Undines manipulate 
escape they automatically water, whether free-flowing or standing. 
sufafreeperat of this dam- They can create currents, eddies and whirl- 
age at the start of every pools, redirect tides, lessen (or heighten) waves, 
round. Escaping requires and so forth. Undines smash enemies with 
the victim to win an opposed pummelling waves, shoot high speed jets 
test of either Acrobatics, Brawn or from afar, or engulf a victim, and crush them 

Evade against the Brawn skill of the elemental. under immense pressure. 
Fach elemental has a number of specific & Movement rates for elementals are as 

abilities corresponding with its type: follows: Gnome 6m, Salamander 8m, 
Shades 10m, Sylph 10m, Undine 

& Gnomes are capable of 
8m. 

manipulating the earth and & Worn  armour  counts 

rock: - making - tunnels, against damage from ele- 
opening pits, or caus- mental strikes, but not 
ing rockslides are against Engulfing 
effortl ess  activitii es 

attacks.. 
for a gnome. They 



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

LF CUuLlTtUuRrEe 
Elf

Elven culture is akin to civilised. Great store is placed on learning 
Elves are natives of the realm known as faerie, a plane co-exis- 

and understanding. Deeds, conduct and integrity are important, and 
tent with the mundane world yet distinct from it. Faerie is accessi- 

desired qualities amongst elves and in others. Dignified manners are 
ble through the glades, woodlands and forests that form the barri- 

expected, and loutish, uncouth behaviour viewed with disdain and 
ers between them. Elves can come and go between the two at will, 

suspicion. Most elven societies have a king or queen, and so loyalty to 
although other races may struggle to do so without an elf guide. 

the monarch is paramount. Elves have trouble understanding societ- 
Elves may even have permanent settlements that belong to neither 

ies that lack such structures, wondering how people can be properly 
one realm nor the other but exist in both simultaneously. 

ordered without a clear, royal leader to guide and represent them. 
The elves have a psychology quite different to that of other spe- 

cies. Otherworldly, wise in natural lore and magic, but often curi- 
CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 

ously naive where mundane matters or emotions are concerned. 
Elves view things through an almost childlike innocence that belies & Loyalty to King/Queen 

their long lifespan and knowledge of the magical world. Compli- & Love (Something emotional) 

cated things are both fascinating and difficult to comprehend. Elves & Hate (any enemy of grace and beauty) 

favour simplicity over complexity but are, nevertheless, a sophisti- 
cated race with their own complex society. 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsIioOnNSs 
Elves are not necessarily all-wise and benevolent. They can be 

Agent, Craftsman, Official, Physician, Priest, Shaman, Scholar, 
as cruel, vindictive, malevolent and mischievous as humans; indeed Scout, Thief, Warrior 
if angered their vengeance can be subtle and painful. When in love 
their passion consumes all else. They occupy rural and forest idylls 
but also build great and splendid cities. They lead peaceful lives but 
are ready to go to war when threatened— and can make tenacious 
and brutal warriors. 

The race tends to be taller than humankind, more 
slender and graceful (all elves have the Light body 
frame), and are distinctive with their fine bone 
structure, narrow, tapering skulls, and narrow, 

pointed ears. Eye colours vary through the 
spectrum, from the human tones through to j-‘ 
the colour of brilliant gems. Elven society is f 
frequently monarchical, and usually governed ‘ 
by a king, queen or both. The elves presented 
here are of the western, specifically Celtic folk- & 
lore. Depending on the campaign setting, the 
magic available to elves will vary as will their 
beliefs. _f 

In Anathaym’ world the elves have 
retreated to their shadowy realm, jealous and 
belligerent at mankind’s ascent. The Elf-Kings 
have long known the practices of sorcery but 
always shunned its power. Now, they see it i3 a 
unique weapon to bring about mankind’s fall. Rl 

Seducing those who covet power, like Kratos, the 
elves have brought sorcery into the hands of men, 
and now need only sit back and watch as they 
begin to abuse its power. 

ELlveEnN CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 
Elves are otherworldly. They seem remote from 

mundane events yet exhibit a comprehension of them that proves 
baffling for humans to understand. Nature is of great impor- 
tance to them, and so they take great care to preserve their 
environments although the greatest care is reserved for those 
areas where faerie is most accessible. As a long-lived species 
(elves live for many centuries) they do not accept or appreci- 
ate time in the same way as humankind, and are 
often unconscious of the passing of small time 
increments. 



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy 
Elven characters begin the game with wondrous goods and 

Athletics 52%, Brawn 47%, Customs 72%, Deceit 67%, Endurance 42%, Evade 
strange currency worth 4d6 x100 silver pieces. 

52%, Insight 69%, Locale 72%, Lore (Faerie) 62%, Perception 69%, Unarmed 

42%, Willpower 56% 
THhEe ELlvVeEnN VOoIiCcEe 

We live in the two realms. Both become one world although Faerie is always 
Combat Style & Weapons 

our ancestral home. All round is beauty, for the world s a beautiful place, and 
Elven Warrior (Sword, Spear, Shield, Bow) 62% 

even in s ugliest recesses there s something of wonder to behold. We are happiest 
though, amongst the glades and woodlands where the animals roam free, and the 

Weapon Size /Force Reach Damage 
mighty oaks remind us of the forests of Faerte, whose trees reach far into the sky. 

Longsword M L 1d8+1d2 6/12 
The spirits surround us, and we understand their presence even when we do 

not communicate with them directly. We know they are always there, watching, Long Spear L VL 1d10+1+1d2 4/10 

and so 1t behoves us to keep the sanctity of nature, preserving its ways, and taking 
Heater Shield L S 1d4+1d2 6/12 

nothing that us notf reely offered. 
Above all we valuefreedom. Freedom in all things: life, expression, meaning Long Bow H - 1d8+1d2 4/7 

To make a slave of something is to kill its spurit, and so we abhor those who 
enslave or shackle things to servitude. Yet we are all willing servants of our king GHhOoUuLl 
and queen because they bring us guidance and dignity, and do not compel us to 

Ghouls are undead creatures that feast on recently deceased 
their whims. Such compulsions are, we observe, human traits. And we have seen 

corpses and carrion. They are only created from sapient races, and 
over the millennia how humans have tried to impose their will on the world, and 

no intelligent species is immune 
have, time and again, farled. Perhaps it us the curse of a short life to have to leave 

to the vile curse that creates a 
a mark. Look aroundy ou: do you see signs of our passing? It is rarefor any elf to 

ghoul. Emaciated, blank-eyed, 
leave more than a_foolprintyetyou younger races have scarred the earth, and will 

and equipped with sharp teeth 
not lve long enough to see these scars. 

and nails, ghouls are driven by 
Yet the younger races intrigue us. Their ways are fascinating and contra- an insatiable hunger for necrotic 

dictory. Humans can be brutal and artful — sometimes logether — and they are flesh that causes them to 
driven to such extremes that one wonders why no higher purpose has yet developed frequent burial sites, bat- 
amongst them. Dwarves hide away beneath the ground, fearful of the sun, of tlefields and charnel pits 
nature, or beauty even though the things they craftfrom metal and precious gems where there is a ready 
are without compare. 

source of decompos- 
Such curious breeds, such curious peoples. Let us show you faerie and true ing meat. 

beauty. Come, walk with me.” Living flesh 
holds no attrac- 

EIf Attributes tion for them, 

STR: 3d6 (11) Action Points 3 but if forced to 
defend them- 

CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier ~ +1d2 
selves ghouls 

SIZ: 2d6+9 (16) Magic Points 16 
will attempt 

DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 6m 
to bite which, 

INT: 2d6+9 (16) Initiative Bonus 14 
if successful, 

POW: 2d6+6 (13) Armour No Natural. Warriors wear introduces the 
any armour magical curse that creates 

CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Life Sense, Night Sight a new ghoul upon the vic- 
tim’s eventual death (which 

Magic Tolk Magic 64% (Dullblade, 

Glamour, Light, Mobility, may be many years away). 

Sleep, Vigour). Specialists Once an infected victim 

favour theism, but any dies, it gives every appear- 

magical path is open to them. ance of having passed on. But, 
after 1d6+3 days it revives 
with an unholy vitality, its soul 

1d20 Location API/HP 
corrupted into an undead spirit 

1-3 Right Leg 0/6 
driven by its foul cravings. The 

4-6 Left Leg 0/6 ghoul scratches its way free of 
7-9 Abdomen 0/7 whatever burial fixture holds it, 
10-12 Chest 0/8 and then goes in search of its 
13-15 Right Arm 0/5 first meal. 

16-18 Left Arm 0/5 The only way to 

19-20 Head 0/6 ensure a ghoul will 

244



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

If a ghoul’s bite penetrates armour the victim must make an 
Ghoul Attributes 

unopposed Endurance roll to resist infection. Failing the roll means 
STR: 3d6+6 (17) Action Points 3 

the victim is infected with the spirit curse that will create a new ghoul 
CON: 3d6+3 (14) Damage Modifier ~ +1d2 upon death. A standard ghoul tactic is to grip an opponent with its 
SIZ: 2d6+6 (13) Magic Points 4 hands, and then target an area of exposed flesh. Once it has bitten 
DEX: 3d6+3 (14) Movement 6m it releases and flees, attempting to find somewhere to skulk until a 

INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 14 threat has passed, and it can resume feeding. 

POW: 1d6 (4) Armour Hardened skin. If buried in it, 

some ghouls will be wearing GIiaAnNTt 
armour. Enormous humans, giants can range in size from several metres 

Abilities Death Sense, Regeneration, tall to potentially dozens, although at the upper range they are 
Undead beyond the capability of most mortals to defeat. Their natural 

Magic None. size, and whether or not they continue to grow in height, depends 
upon the setting. The most common giants are between four and 

1d20 Location AP/HP ten metres tall. Whilst ostensibly a sapient race, a few giants are so 

1-3 Right Leg 0/6 dim-witted or ponderous of thought that they are in effect less intel- 
ligent than animals, and act accordingly. 

46 Left Leg 0/6 
Myth has it that giants are bad-tempered, sometimes desirous of 

79 Abdomen 0/7 
human flesh, and bread made of bones and generally unpleasant to 

10-12 Chest 0/8 
encounter. Some, like the fabled etten, have two heads. However, in 

13-15 Right Arm 0/5 truth, giants come in all dispositions, ranging from the nasty, through 
16-18 Left Arm 0/5 the surly to those who are genuinely friendly. Giants then, are as 
19-20 Head 0/6 diverse as their smaller cousins, and need not be ground-stomping 

man-caters. In Meerish legend the giants are the heralds of the gods. 
Myceras’ herald is a gigantic minotaur who rides a chariot the size 

Athletics 51%, Brawn 50%, Endurance 58%, Evade 48%, Perception 47%, of a galley pulled by enormous bonacon. When the giants appear, 
Unarmed 71%, Willpower 38% legends say, the gods are preparing for war. 

What is common to giant species though, is a relatively primi- 
Combat Style & Weapons tive culture. Most are solitary beings although some form complex, 
Elven Warrior (Sword, Spear, Shield, Bow) 62% barbarian or perhaps civilised societies where giants as a race are 

common (although this tends to be a rarity). Their size makes the 
Weapon Size/Torce Reach Damage 

creation of artefacts, such as weapons and armour, quite difficult 
Claws S T 1d4+1d2 As for Arm given the amount of raw materials and sheer logistics of production 

Teeth S T 1d3+1d2 As for Head difficult. As such many giants rely on natural armour and impro- 
vised weapons, such as huge branches and tree-trunks. Given their 

not rise from an infected body is to burn it as soon as possible — size, such large weapons allow for sweeping effects and, of course, 

which is one of the reasons why certain cultures cremate, rather bigger giants can stomp their foes with massive feet using their 

than bury, their dead. Trample ability. 

Lifting a ghoul’s curse can only be done through a Cure Malady When battling any giant, melee combat Hit Locations are rolled 

spell of a Magnitude greater than the POW of the ghoul which bit on 1d10 or even 1d6 indicating the difficulty (or sheer impossibility) 

them. An infected victim may not even be aware of their fate; those of reaching the upper areas of the body. Range weapon users roll 

that are, are doomed without magical intervention. Even hacking 1d20 as normal. 

off a bitten limb will not lift the curse that impregnates the soul and The example given here is for a four metre giant. For each addi- 

hibernates, waiting for death so it can be triggered. tonal 2 metres of height add +3 STR, +6 SIZ and +1 Armour 

Ghouls, being undead, are extremely difficult to destroy. As part Point. 

of their transformation their skin desiccates and hardens, granting 
them a bonus of 1 Armour Point to whatever natural protection ONnEe HEeAaDd oORr TwOo?? 
they once had. In addition the dire potency of their animating curse Some giants — commonly those_found in British myths — have two 

allows them slowly to regenerate damage. Even a dismembered heads. Each head has ils own personality and it is common_for the heads 
ghoul will eventually regrow new body parts at the rate of one Hit lo argue with each other; agreeing only that whatever us standing before the 
Point per location every week until it is complete once more. The giant 1s good enough to be stompedf lat and ground-up forf lowr. Adding an 
only sure way to kill one is with fire, which inflicts normal damage. additional head us unlikely to grant any serious combat advantage to the 

Ghoul characteristics are based upon those of the originally giant, but it does mean that severing only one head does not automatically 
infected creature. They gain +6 STR, +3 CON, +3 DEX| their kill at. Indeed, depending on the general disposition between the heads, 
INT is converted to INS and CHA is lost entirely,. POW, no matter the surviving bonce may even consuder that us enemies have just done it 
what it started with, is replaced with 1d6. The following ghoul is a_ javour. 

based on a human cadaver. - 4 

245



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Goblins are cowardly by nature: an outnumbered goblin will flee 
Giant Attributes 

or surrender. They prefer to outnumber their foes, and so will not 
STR: 2d6%15 (22 Action Foints ’ engage unless they have greater numbers (and usually hunt and raid 
CON: 2d6+12 (19) Damage Modifier ~ +1d10 in packs of 1d6+3). 

SIZ: 2d6+21 (28) Magic Points 11 The characteristics above are for a standard goblin or orc. Hob- 
DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 12m goblins have 2d6+8 STR and SIZ, but otherwise the same charac- 

INT: 3d6 (11) Initiative Bonus 11 teristics. As leaders they can be expected to have better weapons 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Thick skin and armour. 

CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Trample 

Magic Some may have Folk Magic Goblin/Orc Attributes 

e [ APIEP STR: 2d6+4 (11) Action Points 2 

13 Right Leg 3/10 CON: 3d6+3 (14) Damage Modifier ~ None 

46 Left Leg 3/10 SIZ: 2d6+4 (11) Magic Points 11 

7-9 Abdomen 3/11 DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 6m 

10-12 Chest 3/12 INT: 1d6+7 (11) Initiative Bonus 11 

13-15 Right Arm 3/9 POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Thick skin. Some wear 

16-18 Left Arm 3/9 additional, scavenged, armour 

19-20 Head 3/10 CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities Night Sight 

Magic Some may have Folk Magic 

or specialised priests and 
Skills 

. shamans 
Athletics 53%, Brawn 80%, Endurance 68%, Evade 42%, Perception 42%, 

Unarmed 63%, Willpower 42% 

Passions 

Greedy 75%, Like Beanstalks 60%, Hate Englishmen 90% ‘\“‘ 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Bash and Smash (Club, Maul, Great Club) 73%, Kick and Stomp 63% 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage P ; G S . L % 

Tree Trunk E VL 2d8+1d10 4/30 : 

Kick L M 1d6+1d10 As for Leg 

Trample L M 1d6+1d10 As for Leg 

GooBbLlIinN/OORrCc 
Stunted, twisted humanoids abound in myth and fan- 

tasy. They go by many names: goblin, hobgoblin, orc, 
and so on. They all have certain similarities; either grey or 
greenish skin, ugly to most eyes, vicious, peevish natures bent 
towards cruelty, and slow, dull-witted intellects. Goblins or orcs 
are the foot soldiers and minions of Evil Gods and their direct 
servants, perpetrators of terrible, murderous raids with sadistic, 
unpleasant fates for those unlucky enough to be captured. Larger, 
tougher goblin species are given an affix such as ‘hob’ (as in hob- 
goblin) or ‘dai’ (as in dai-bakemono, the Japanese name for such 
creatures) which means great, terrible or tough. 

Goblins dislike the light, and make their homes beneath ground 
where they may well be natural enemies of dwarves. Their societies 
are crude — not much above the primitive— and they prefer to steal 
rather than create, making raids on communities where weapons, 
armour, food, and other commodities they want are found in abun- 
dance. Goblins are sly and pernicious; they cannot be trusted, and 
they even dislike and distrust their own kind. 

246



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

1d20 Location API/HP warning or hide their features so as to enter into discourse with those 
they need rather than killing them outright. 

1-3 Right Leg 1/5 
The primary means of offense is the Gaze attack, which the gor- 

4-6 Left Leg 1/5 
gon must activate on its turn at the cost of 1 Magic Point. Any mortal 

7-9 Abdomen 1/6 
creature looking in the direction of the gorgon, who can potentially 

10-12 Chest 1/7 
see its face, must make an opposed roll of its Willpower versus the 

13-15 Right Arm 1/4 gorgon’s. If the gorgon wins the victim meets its gaze and is petri- 
16-18 Left Arm 1/4 fied completely, resulting in instant death. If gorgon loses, the victim 
1920 Head 1/5 manages to avert its eyes before the petrifaction can take effect. 

In some Greek iconography the gorgons are depicted as winged 
women with broad round heads, serpentine hair, the tusks of boars, 

Athletics 52%, Brawn 42%, Deceit 57%, Endurance 48%, Evade 62%, Perception lolling tongues, flared nostrils, and sometimes short coarse beards. 
61%, Unarmed 52%, Willpower 42% Clearly they were dreadful demons and Games Masters are encour- 

aged to make their gorgons as grotesque and terrible as needed. 
They need not follow the serpentine form shown in this example 

Passions 
and, indeed, may also possess wings. 

Hate the Light 90%, Hate Non-Goblins 95%, Love Hurting Things 80% 

FiIgGhHTtIinNgG Aa GOoRrGgOoNn 
Combat Style & Weapons Risking a gorgon’s gaze directly is stupid and dangerous. How- 
Goblin Warrior (Shortsword, Shield, Spear, Sling) 62% ever looking at the creature in reflection poses no risk of petrifaction. 

Those who are determined to slay a gorgon then, should use a mir- 
Weapon Size /Force Reach Damage 

ror or the interior of a metal shield, polished to provide a mirror-like 
Shortsword M S 1d6 6/8 surface. Fighting using reflection reduces the hero’s combat style by 

Shortspear M L 1d8+1 4/5 two difficulty grades. Another alternative is to fight blindfold or with 
the eyes obscured. In this case, the combat style is reduced by three 

Target Shield L S 1d4 4/9 
grades... 

Anyone surviving long enough 

GOoRrGgOoNn to enter close combat with a 

In Greek myth the gorgons were sisters cursed to immortality, gorgon must deal with the 

and a hideousness that turned mortals to stone instantly. Descrip- snake hair as well as the 

tions of these creatures vary, but MYTHRAS gorgons are mortal monster’s tail and tal- 

demons with the lower half of immense serpents, and the upper ons. The snakes attack 

body of a woman. The face of a gorgon is truly hideous for mortals as one entity, striking 

to gaze upon, and catching sight of an unreflected gorgon’s visage at Short reach. The 

petrifies living tissue as described below. In place of hair, living, individual fangs are 

writhing snakes frame the gorgon’s deadly face, and their too small to 

fingers terminate in claws of razor-sharp iron. 
Such is the deadliness of a gorgon that these monsters 

must remain isolated from contact with the outside world. 
Temples, tombs and catacombs are their favoured retreats 
with those who worship them placing offerings of meat and 
drink at the very outer reaches of the lair before retreating 
swiftly. The unlucky souls who, out of curiosity, remained to 
see if the rumours were true stand as stone guardians, fea- 
tures twisted in cruel realization. 

Despite their divine or infernal origin gorgons are vul- 
nerable to mortal weapons. Their blood howeveris a deadly 
poison, so coming into contact with the ichor, whether 
being caught in a spray of blood (such as from a Bleed 
special effect) or when cleaning a blade used to wound the 
monster, forces the victim to resist its venomous touch. 

Whilst having a monstrous nature and appearance, 
gorgons are not necessarily evil-doers. Victims of circum- 
stance, their tempers have certainly been warped into mur- 
derous anger, but gorgons are intelligent, and from time to 
time use their beautiful voices to seduce servants who can 
walk abroad and do their bidding. Gorgons may give fair 



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

inflict significant damage, but on a successful bite against an unpro- 
GRrIiFfFfiInN/HIiPpPpOoGgRrIiFfFf 

tected foe (or by use of the Inject Venom special effect) the gorgon 
Several spellings describe the same creature: griffon, gryphon, 

will inject a venom with a potency equivalent to the gorgon’s Endur- 
and the one used here. A combination of the head, forequarters and 

ance. The poison acts on the Combat Round after introduction par- 
wings of a giant eagle, with the hindquarters of a lion. Griffins are 

alysing the affected area. Paralysis of the abdomen means both legs 
tenacious airborne predators that make their eyries in high places 

stop working. Paralysis of the chest or head leads to death within a 
and prey on livestock up to and including horses. Although not 

number of turns equal to the victim’s CON as organs begin to fail. 
known for fixating on humans, attacks are not unknown especially 

The gaze attack of a gorgon head remains effective even after a 
if one wanders, mounted or on foot, into a griffin’s hunting territory 

gorgon’s death, the Willpower of the monster being equivalent to 
(which can span many kilometres from an eyrie. 

its living form. Using a head in this manner however can be very 
Griffins are fast and clever, employing dive attacks to harry their 

dangerous since both friends and foes (and even the wielder if they 
prey, exhausting it before swooping down to snatch it up with their 

fumble) can become ensnared by the indiscriminate gaze. 
immense claws. Attacks from the air are favoured over those from 
ground, but on land a griffin is not the ungainly creature it might 

Gorgon Attributes seem to be. It hunkers low, like a lion, to circle its prey, and strikes 

STR: 3d6+6 (17) Action Points 3 out with both beak and claws to grip and slash, immobilizing the foe 
before taking to the wing once more. 

CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier — +1d4 
Griffins usually form mated pairs that share an eyrie, and carve 

SIZ: 3d6+6 (17) Magic Points 16 
out a wide hunting territory that is defended from other predators 

DEX: 3d6+6 (17) Movement 6m 
and other griffins. Mated pairs tend to hunt in concert save for when 

INT: 2d6+9 (16) Initiative Bonus 14 (includes Armour Penalty) one remains to protect eggs or fledglings; yet if one gets into trouble 
POW: 2d6+9 (16) Armour Scales on serpentine it can unleash a powerful screech guaranteed to be heard by its mate, 

locations; Hoplite armour on and bring them to aid. Thus, when dealing with one griffin, a second 
upper body. is never far away. 

CHA: 3d6(11) Abilities Gaze Attack, Immunity Griffins can be tamed and used as human mounts if captured 
(Poisons), Terrifying, as chicks and raised for the task. Full-grown griffins are too wild 
Venomous to be tamed although stories exist of bonds being formed between 

Magic Devotion 57%, Exhort 67% some individuals and humans. Griffin cavalry mounts are therefore 
(Dismiss Magic, Enthrall, a much sought-after thing in certain cultures leading to daring raids 
Fear, Illusion) on griffin eyries for eggs and chicks; though the mortality rate for 

such adventures is high. 
1d20 Location AP/HP Hippogriffs are the result of a mating between a horse and a 

1-3 Tail Tip 4/6 griffin. Hippogriffs combine the head, forequarters and wings of a 

46 Mid Tail 4/7 giant eagle with the legs and hindquarters of a horse. These crea- 

7-9 Lower Body 4/8 tures inhabit similar territories to griffing but form quite separate 

10-12 Chest 5/9 communities — usually nesting in groups of up to twelve individuals. 
Hippogriffs display a higher measure of tolerance to their griffin 

13-15 Right Arm 5/6 
cousins and are somewhat easier to train and use as mounts. In all 

16-18 Left Arm 5/6 
other respects they act as griffins. 

19-20 Head 2/7 

Athletics 64%, Brawn 74%, Deceit 57%, Endurance 72%, Evade 74%, Insight 

62%, Perception 72%, Seduction 67%, Track 62%, Willpower 72% 

Passions 

Love Solitude 90%, Resent Mortals 70%, Hate Beauty 70% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Gorgon Horror (Talons, Tail, Snake Hair, Gaze and Bow) 74% 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Talons M S 1d4+1d4 As for Arm 

Tail L L 1d6+1d4 As for Tail 

Recurve Biw H - 1d8+1d4 4/8 

Snake Hair S S Poison As for head 

Gaze Special - - 

248



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Griffin Attributes 

STR: 3d6+12 (23) Action Points 3 

CON: 3d6+6 (17) Damage Modifier ~ +1d12 

SIZ: 3d6+24 (35) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 3d6+12 (23) Movement 8m, 18m (Flying) 

INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 18 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Teathers and Hide 

CHA: 2d6+12(19) Abilities Diving Strike, Flying 

Magic None 

1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-2 Right Hind Leg 1/11 

3-4 Left Hind Leg 1/11 

5-7 Hindquarters 1/12 

8-10 Torequarters 2/13 

11-12 Right Wing 2/10 

13-14 Left Wing 2/10 

15-16 Right Front Leg 2/11 

17-18 Left Front Leg 2/11 

19-20 Head 2/11 

Skills 

Athletics 76%, Brawn 78%, Endurance 64%, Evade 66%, Fly 76%, Perception 

64%, Willpower 52% 
HAaLlFflUinNGg CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 

Despite being physically smaller and weaker than most other 
Combat Style & Weapons sapient species, halflings compensate with a certain nimbleness that 
Combat Style: Death from Above (Beak, Claws) 86% serves them well in sticky situations. Although unadventurous they 

are not cowardly: halflings might say they are, but when it comes to 
Weapon Size/ Force Reach Damage 

fighting for their homes and way of life they can summon enormous 
Beak H M 1d10+1d12 As for Head reserves of courage. In short, halflings make for good player char- 

acters — especially for those players who prefer sneaking around to 
Claws H L 1d8+1d12 As for Leg 

stalking boldly across the moorland. 

HAaLlFfLlIinNgG CUuLlTtUuRrEe 
Peaceful, civilized folk who live a largely agrarian existence, Hal- Halflings are Civilised, and use the Civilised skill choices found 

flings are diminutive humanoids who are shorter than dwarves by on pages 14 to 15. Their communities are closely-knit villages and 
around a head, but lighter of frame. Their homes are farms and small towns with several extended families forming the basis of the 
steads with villages forming close-knit communities. Halflings are community. Their industries are basic: agriculture primarily, but also 
not the most adventurous of races, and can go largely unnoticed as handicrafts such as pottery, weaving, leatherworking and textiles. 
they pose no kind of threat to anyone. They do work metals but very infrequently for weapons and armour. 

Halflings might be mistaken for dwarves but the differences are The common cultural unit for halflings is the Riding; an area 
obvious to those in the know. Halflings have large, rugged feet that bounded by three towns which makes the size of each riding vary 
are oversized for the body. Shoes and boots are shunned; the feet considerably. A Borough is formed of three Ridings. 
are extremely thick-soled providing more than adequate protection 
against rocks and stones. CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 

Whilst they are generally unadventurous, halflings are inquisitive. 
& Loyalty to Village, Town or Riding 

They like to know, and share, secrets. They adore stories, myths and 
& Love (Something emotional) 

fables, and have enquiring minds. This means that, when abroad, 
& Hate (Heavy Industry) 

the world is a fascinating place to be questioned and taken in — and 
this can lead them into trouble. Otherwise they are a rather prosaic, 
content race that keeps to itself, and prefer neither to interfere with PRrOoFfEeSsSsIioOnNSs 
the wider world or have it interfere with them. Beast Handler, Craftsman, Entertainer, Farmer, Fisherman, 

Herder, Merchant, Official, Physician, Scholar, Thief, Warrior 

249



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Halfling characters begin the game with commodities or cur- 
Shortsword S S 1d4+1-1d4 6/8 

rency worth 4d6 x30 silver pieces. 
Buckler M S 1d3-1d4 6/9 

THhEe HAaLlFfLlIinNgG VOoIiCcEe 
Sling L - 1d8-1d4 1/2 

‘Our Ruding — that us to say, the West Ruding — was_founded by the Hoar- 
Joots who were joined by the Slintwistles, and then, later the Argreaves. Now, the 
Hoarfoots never liked the Shintwistles much on account of Old Man Shintwistle HAaRrPpYy 
neglecting to invite Old Man Hoarfoot lo his birthday party. Truth be told, he Monsters from legend, harpies combine the head and breast of 

did, but forgot to post the invitation, so it just goes to show you what trouble a woman — usually an ugly, peevish hag — with the lower body and 

Jorgetfulness can getyou indo. wings of a vulture. Harpies are cruel, pernicious creatures that revel 

Where was I? Ah, yes, the West Riding. So, there are three villages — because in tormenting and inflicting suffering. It is rare for them to kill a foe 

that’s what Riding means: three — Hoarenderby, Slintenderby and Greavenderby outright, preferring instead to snatch, scratch and bite before flying 

named_for each of the founding families you see. Hoarenderby is famed for is off to a safe distance and shricking insults. 

wool, because it has good, soft water coming down off those hills which are just A favoured torment is the theft and despoiling of food. Harpies 

perfect for grazing sheep. Slintenderby produces the finest vegetables out of any might target an outdoors feast or banquet, or deliberately steal from 

districtyou care to mention, and Greavenderby’s beer is worth wearing shoes_for: food stores, setting out to wreck a fine harvest or ruin what mea- 

Areyou kungry? I am. Inf act, why don’t we walk to the Grey Lion at Greav- gre supplies a community has managed to put down for the winter 

enderby and have a jug off inest ale? I prefer Nadger’s Tat myself, because it has months. They rarely take food for their own sustenance: their delight 

that hoppiness, but I know you southerners prefer something a little lighter, so I'd is purely in denying others. Harpies typically dive and strike, aiming 

say go_for the Golden Honeydew. But, really, you can’t go wrong with anything for the head and upper body, inflicting scratches with their sharp 

you drink at the Grey Lion because Duffer Widget — he’s the landlord — knows claws. Additionally they attempt to seize weapons and shields (using 

fus cellaring, and none of fus beers are ever sows; off or watered. And they do a the Grip special effect) which they then carry away and drop, well 

cracking plate of bread and cheese to. .. out of reach. 

C’mon... I know! Let’s sing a walking song as we go...’ Harpies are natural enemies of iqari. If iqari move into a region 
frequented by harpies they devote their efforts to driving off or kill- 

Halfling Attributes ing the monsters as quickly as possible. 

STR: 2d6 (7) Action Points 3 

Attributes 
CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier ~ -1d4 

STR: 3d6 (11) Action Points 3 
SIZ: 1d3+6 (8) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 3d6+3 (14) Movement 4m CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier ~ None 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 14 SI1Z: 1d6+9 (13) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 4d6+6 (20) Movement 4m, 12m (Flying) 
POW: 3d6 (11) Armour None 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 17 
CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities None 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Teathers 
Magic Usually none, but halfling 

specialists can follow any CHA: 1d6 (4) Abilities Diving Attack, Flying 

magical path. Magic None 

1d20 Location AP/HP 1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Right Leg 0/4 1-3 Right Claw 1/5 

4-6 Left Leg 0/4 46 Left Claw 1/5 

7-9 Abdomen 0/5 79 Abdomen 1/6 

10-12 Chest 0/6 10-12 Chest 0/7 

13-15 Right Arm 0/3 13-15 Right Wing 1/4 

16-18 Left Arm 0/3 16-18 Left Wing 1/4 

19-20 Head 0/4 19-20 Head 0/5 

Skills 

Athletics 41%, Brawn 35%, Craft (any) 57%, Customs 66%, Deceit 46%, Athletics 51%, Brawn 44%, Deceit 57%, Endurance 42%, Evade 60%, Fly 71%, 

Endurance 62%, Evade 68%, Insight 54%, Locale 66%, Lore (Agriculture) 56%, Perception 64%, Willpower 42% 

Perception 64%, Sleight 55%, Stealth 67%, Unarmed 41%, Willpower 52% 

Passions 

Combat Style & Weapons Greed 99%, Spiteful 95%, Love Suffering 95% 

Halfling Constable (Sword, Sling, Shield) 51% 

250



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

swarm activity, with individuals targeting exposed areas of flesh with 
Combat & Weapons 

stings, and bites to drive a foe away. 
Snatch and Grab (Claws) 71% 

It is almost impossible to kill a swarm: there are simply too many 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage individuals. The only hope is to either outrun it or find a way of tak- 
ing cover (water is not always an effective way of evading a swarm 

Claws M M 1d4 As for Claw 
of insects, since they often wait about for the victim to surface). A 
swarm may decide to cease an attack if it collectively feels a threat 

HOoRrSsEe has been neutralized: after 1d3 rounds of combat, make a Willpower 
There are many varieties of horse, bred for different purposes. roll for the swarm. If the roll is successful then the swarm abates its 

All have enormous stamina and capacity for hard work. Most cul- attacks, and returns to its nest or previous activity. 
tures have domesticated the horse for use as a primary riding and A swarm can be harmed if an attack — magical or mundane — 
beast of burden. which inflicts area damage can be directed at the swarm, engulf- 

This example is for a standard riding mount that can be bought ing at least 75% of it. In such cases the swarm has a number of 
or hired by most adventurers. For a War Horse — one bred specif- Hit Points equal to its SIZ, and any damage reduces the size of the 
ically for its size and reliability in battle — add a further 4 to both swarm commensurately. 
STR and SIZ. For a Heavy Horse — one used specifically for heavy The normal characteristics for creatures are not applicable to 
agricultural work, add 8 to STR and SIZ instead. swarms. Instead, only one characteristic is given: SIZ. This is used 

to gauge the volume of the swarm in comparison with an average 
Attributes human. A swarm of SIZ 6 is enough to engulf one half of the body. 

STR: 2d6+15 (22) Action Points 2 A swarm of 12 is enough to engulf the entire body. A swarm of SIZ 
24 could engulf two opponents simultaneously. The potency of the 

CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d12 
attack is based on SIZ, as follows: 

SIZ: 2d6+24 (31) Magic Points 7 

DEX: 2d6+3 (10) Movement 12m 
InNsSeEcCtT SwWAarRmM DAaMmAaGgEe 

INS: 2d6+4 (11) Initiative Bonus 11 /A Sting/Bite Damage Combat Actions 

POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Hide 1-5 1 1 

Abilities None 6-11 1d2 2 

Magic None 12-18 1d3 3 

19-25 1d4 4 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

26-33 1d6 5 
1-3 Right Hind Leg 1/9 

4-6 Left Hind Leg 1/9 The damage from stings and bites are applied simultaneously to 
7-9 Hindquarters 1/10 every location covered by the swarm. Worn armour initially counts 
10-12 Forequarters 1/11 against this damage, but is reduced by 1 point for each successtul 
13-14 Right Front Leg 1/8 attack, as the insects begin to crawl inside gaps in the clothing. For 

15-16 Left Front Leg 1/8 example, a victim wearing brigandine armour who stumbles into a 

1720 Head 1/9 swarm of SIZ 6, will be immune to the swarm’s first three attacks but 
eventually the insects will find a way in. Normal clothing provides no 

Skills protection, unless especially thick — for example winter wear. 

Athletics 52%, Brawn 83%, Endurance 66%, Evade 40%, Perception 48%, Swarms do not generate Special Effects, and neither do they 

Willpower 34% use Combat Actions to parry or evade unless attacked with an area 
affect assault. On the other hand a victim can use Evade to tempo- 

Combat Style & Weapons rarily avoid a swarm. Otherwise they must flee, hide or seek cover. 

Rear and Plunge (Hoofs) 62% Swarms fly at a base Movement Rate of 4, but can augment this rate 
by using their Athletics skill. 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

SwWAarRmM SKkIiLlLlSs:: 
Hoof H L 1d6+1d12 As for Leg 

Athletics 60%, Fly 60%, Willpower 30%, Swarm Attack (Stings 
or Bites) 60% 

Whenever a character is stung by a swarm of poisonous insects, 
InNsSeEcCtT SwWAarRmM 

he may succumb to the increasing levels of venom introduced into 
Insects on their own are a nuisance. As an angry swarm, they 

his body. Keep track of the accumulating value of the damage suf- 
can be lethal. A swarm of bees or wasps can contain thousands of 

fered from each attack, which represents the growing toxicity of the 
individuals, all acting in concert. Most swarms are not in response 

venom. Every time the character experiences another attack, they 
to a threat — although it is an effective tactic — but as part of the 

must make an opposed roll of their Endurance versus the new level 
reproductive cycle. However, any disturbance of a hive can result in 

of toxicity. Failure means that they suffer the effects of the insect’s 
venom. 

251



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

I]qQAaRrIi Attributes 

A humanoid race with the head, wings and lower body of a STR: 3d6+12 (23) Action Points 3 
giant raptor (eagle is the most common, but there are also hawk, CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 
owl, kestrel and osprey species), and the upper body of a human; SIZ: 2d6+12 (19) Magic Points 11 
the iqari dwell in the high places of the world: mountains and hills DEX: 2d6+12 (19) Movement 6m, 18m (Flying) 
surrounded by open pastures and deep valleys. They shun contact 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 14 (includes armour) 
with most other sapient races although it has been known for cer- 
tain iqari, deemed mad by their kin, to seek out social contact with POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Teathers, Leather Kilt and 

others. Vambraces 

Iqari are fierce and tenacious hunters, patrolling the skies above CHA: 3d6(11) Abilities Diving Attack, Flying 

their territories in search of prey that can either be carried back Magic Iqari generally practice 

to the eyries or killed, and butchered in-situ with meat then being Mysticism (Meditation 56%, 

returned. Iqari hunters always carry the tools requisite for the job: a Mysticism 54%). Specialist 

hunting spear, flint knives (occasionally metal), and bone needles for shaman also gain Animism 

sewing sacks from the skin of the prey to carry their spoils. Favoured (Trance 64%, Binding 62%) 

quarry are mammals of most sizes, but iqari shy away from attack- 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

ing anything too large because, even with superior numbers, butch- 
ering, and carrying away the remains would take too long and leave 1-3 Right Leg 2/7 

the hunting pack exposed. 46 Left Leg 2/7 

Iqari are intelligent and social amongst their own kind. An eyrie 79 Abdomen 3/8 

consists of up to six or seven iqari (parents and young) with many 10 Chest 0/9 
eyries clustered together forming a settlement. They worship the 

11-12 Right Wing 0/7 
spirits of the air and mountains, and iqari shaman can be powerful 

13-14 Left Wing 0/7 
animists able to channel and harness both the great ancestor spir- 
its and the spirits of the hunt and the winds. Their language is a 15-16 Right Arm 1/6 
complex amalgam of squawks, chitters, head movements, hand and 

17-18 Left Arm 1/6 
wing gestures. They are incapable of speaking human tongues but 
can understand them and use sign language to communicate back. 19-20 Head 2/7 

However, given their reclusive nature, opportunities for encounter- 
ing an iqari capable of understand human language is rare. 

They have few natural enemies, although there is competition Athletics 62%, Brawn 62%, Endurance 56%, Evade 58%, Fly 82%, Paralyzing 

between iqari, griffins and hippogriffs for hunting territories. This Screech 62%, Perception 64%, Sign Language 54%, Stealth 52%, Survival 54%, 

can result in spectacular and bloody aerial battles, ultimately end- Unarmed 72%, Willpower 52% 

ing in a certain degree of demarcation and co-operation. Iqari have 
very high standards of personal honour. A worthy sapient foe will be Combat Style & Weapons 

allowed to live to fight another day, and if the opponent was truly Iqari Warrior (Spear, Beak, Claw, Wing Strike) 72% 

worthy of respect, the iqari warrior may gift it with a wing feather 
Size/Force Reach Damage 

— the highest honour these creatures can bestow. The one creature 
iqari will aim to slaughter are harpies. These airborne hags are the Beak M T 1d4+1d8 As for Head 

complete antithesis of iqari, and the birdmen show little mercy Claw M S 1d6+1d8 As for Leg 
when harpies stray into their regions. 

The iqari’s Paralysing Screech skill (base POW+CHA) forces Wing Strike L VL 1d3+1d8 As for Wing 

those within 5 metres to make an opposed Willpower roll against the Longspear L VL 1d10+1+1d8 4/10 

iqari’s skill. Anyone who is unsuccessful is paralysed by the horrific 
noise for a single combat round and temporarily deafened. Those in the iqari experiencing the equivalent of a panic attack, and this 
who make their roll are merely deafened for 1d6 melee rounds, may result in extremely manic, and possibly even violent behaviour 

unable to communicate verbally. Each successful use of this ability especially if an exit is not in evidence. 
costs the iqari a single magic point. A further challenge is that of language. Iqari are not equipped 

with the vocal organs to even approximate human speech, and so 
IqQAaRrIi CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs sign language is essential if the creature is to make itself understood 

Playing an iqari can pose some challenges unless all the charac- (although understanding sapient tongues is quite possible). And, as 
ters are also iqari. Those iqari who seek out the company of other raptors, iqari are exclusively carnivorous preferring either live meat 
races are considered insane by their own kind and, indeed, may be or raw, freshly killed food. This too may prove to be a challenge for 
in the throes of some psychosis. non-iqari in a party. 

Iqari abhor confinement. Buildings and rooms hold a special fear Otherwise, iqari are an intelligent species with a sophisticated 
for them as they have an innate need to see the open sky at all times. system of honour and its recognition. Iqari society has a rigorous 
Venturing underground, even for brief periods, requires a successful set of laws to ensure that they do not return back to the beasts they 
Willpower roll which must be remade every hour. Failed rolls result were raised from. These are formalised into ritual songs which are 

252



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsIioOnNSs 
Craftsman, Hunter, Shaman, Warrior 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy 
Igari characters begin the game with commodities or currency 

worth 4d6 x10 silver pieces. 

ThHEe I1qQAaRrIi VOoIiCcEe 

You shall not be an animal. 
You shall not steal another’s glory. 
You shall not act against a brother without open challenge. 
Let those with less glory actf urst. 
Defend_your eyre orfind another 
Guwe surplus to those less able. 
Maiming during play is loss of self control. 
Needless death threatensfuture eggs. 
Fall not upon the prey at the furst smell of blood, 
lest someone be hunting yours; 
Withhold the claw in times of insufferable insult, 
lest it snatches away your reputation; 
Fat not the flesh of thinking life, 
lest your appetite consumes_your soul. 
A clear mind costs only patience.’ 

Typical Igari mantra taught to fledglings. 

repeatedly sung to the young. They are taught that the only thing 
LioonN 

preventing the iqari from devolving are their principles. Those who 
Savannah and plains-dwelling big cats, lions form prides of 

break the laws have no honour, and are thus considered mindless 
animals. This sense of personal honour is so strong that if an Iqari between 10 and 20 (around five females and cubs, and two or three 

breaks the codes, even by no fault of their own, the psychologi- males). Males excluded from a pride can, and do, become rogue 
wanderers, and so lions can also be encountered singly. The females 

cal backlash can drive them into insanity...and insanity generally 
perform most of the hunting with the males guarding the pride’s 

equates to self destruction. 
territory from other prides and interlopers. 

CUuLlTtUuRrEe Hunting is a co-ordinated business with three or more lionesses 

Iqari society is strange by human standards but most closely stalking and chasing-down prey over a protracted period. Such 

resembles the Primitive and Barbarian cultures, depending on the teamwork increases the success of the hunt. Fach lioness in a hunt- 

size and sophistication of the community. Smaller communities tend ing party has a preferred role, with a leader and stalkers who trian- 

more towards the primitive whilst larger, older ones tend more to gulate to reduce the chance of prey escaping. 

embody the barbarian. Skill choices should reflect one of these two It is rare for lions to prey on humans but not unheard of. Settle- 

cultures. ments with livestock populations that are established too close to a 
pride’s territories increases the chance of attacks, and rogue males 

& Customs+40%, Native Tongue+40% (particularly the sick or injured), driven by hunger, will look for what- 
& Standard Skills: Brawn, Dance, Endurance, Locale, Percep- ever prey is available. 

tion, Sing, Unarmed 
& Example Combat Styles: Iqari Hunter, Eyrie Sentinel, Fallen 

Lion Attributes 
Psychotic 

& Professional Skills: Courtesy, Craft (any primitive), Fly, Lore STR: 2d6+12(19) Action Points 3 

(any), Meditation, Mysticism, Navigation, Survival CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 

SIZ: 2d6+15 (22) Magic Points 7 

DEX: 3d6+6 (17) Movement 8m 
CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 

INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 15 
& Loyalty to Eyrie 

POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Mane and Hide 
& Love (Freedom) 
& Hate (Confinement) Abilities Intimidate, Night Sight 

Magic None 

253



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

1d20 Location AP/HP Lizard, Giant Attributes 

1-2 Right Hind Leg 1/7 STR: 2d6+12(19) Action Points 3 

34 Left Hind Leg 1/7 CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d6 
5-7 Hindquarters 1/8 SIZ: 2d6+12 (19) Magic Points 7 
8-10 Forequarters 1/9 DEX: 1d6+12 (16) Movement 10m 

11-13 Right Front Leg 1/7 INS: 2d6+5 (12) Initiative Bonus 14 

14-16 Left Front Leg 1/7 
POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Tough Scales 

1720 Head 3/7 
Abilities Adhering (some), Cold 

Blooded, Intimidate 

Magic None 

Athletics 66%, Brawn 61%, Endurance 52%, Evade 54%, Perception 50%, 

Willpower 44% 1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Tail 3/7 

4-5 Right Hind Leg 3/7 
Combat Style & Weapons 

6-7 Left Hind Leg 3/7 
King Slayer (Bite, Claw) 76% 

8-10 Hindquarters 3/8 

Size/ Force Reach Damage 11-14 Forequarters 3/9 

Bite L S 1d8+1d8 As for Head 15-16 Right Front Leg 3/6 

17-18 Left Front Leg 3/6 
Claw L M 1d6+1d8 As for Leg 

19-20 Head 3/7 

LizaARrDd,, GIiaAnNTt 
Many species of giant lizard exist and, whilst appearances will 

differ, most giant lizards share very similar characteristics. They are Athletics 65%, Brawn 58%, Endurance 56%, Evade 72%, Perception 68%, Track 

all cold-blooded, all predators of some kind, and all need warm to 55%, Stealth 68%, Willpower 44% 

hot conditions to thrive. Lizards are found throughout jungles, arid 
areas, hills and mountains as long as their environmental needs are 
being met. Combat Style & Weapons 

Sight is highly important for most types of lizard, both for locat- Scaly Hunter (Jaws, Claws) 75% 

ing prey and for communication. Consequently many lizards have 
Size/Force Reach Damage 

highly acute colour and heat vision, and therefore excellent percep- 
tion. Most lizards rely heavily on body language, using specific pos- Bite M T 1d6+1d6 As for Head 

tures, gestures and movements to define territory, resolve disputes 
Claw M M 1d4+1d6 As for Leg 

and entice mates, which leads to deliberate, almost ritualistic move- 
ments that some cultures reflect in religious dances and ceremonies. 

Many lizards are brightly coloured to warn potential predators, LizzaZrAdRmDMaAnN//OOPpHhIidDIiaAnN 
but some keep their colouration hidden until needed (with crests, Classic creatures of fantasy literature Lizardmen and Ophidians 

wattles, on the underside of the belly, and so forth). Lizards are ter- are closely related species of bipedal sapient reptiles. Lizardmen are 

ritorial, and guard their territories against other predators but are, self explanatory, possessing muscular bodies, clawed hands and feet, 

generally, ambivalent towards humans unless hungry or threatened. clongated snouts filled with snaggle teeth, heavy tails and scaled, 

Some species, like the monitor lizards, are notorious for attacks, and often beautifully coloured skin. Ophidians are similar but take their 

will consider anything warm blooded and moving fair prey. primary attributes from snakes rather than lizards; and thus have 

Lizards apply a number of different techniques when hunting, a leaner, more humanoid build, stubbier snouts, venomous fangs 

anything from launching ambushes from cover, dropping atop vic- instead of peg teeth, and are more intelligent than their brethren. 

tims, or even running rapidly over concealed patches of quicksand Both species share a cold, reptilian outlook on life; but whereas 

or water to lure prey to a lingering death. lizardmen tend to form primitive or occasionally barbarian societ- 

A defensive technique used by some lizard species is to shed the ies, the ophidians are naturally inclined to civilisation, and all the 

tail completely if it is grabbed and held by a predator. The tail will decadence and treachery which it brings. Like chalk and cheese, 

regenerate but is usually shorter and of a different hue to the orig- one is a race of illiterate savages, the other amoral and urbane. The 

inal. Detaching the tail in this fashion causes the lizard no wound lizardmen are more prone to direct physical confrontation whereas 

effects. ophidians prefer subtle manipulation or assassination. 
With their thick scales, and inured resilience towards both damp 

and desiccated environments, the reptilian races prefer to live in 
regions deemed living hells, such as burning deserts, arid waste- 
lands, pestilent swamps, and steamy, tropical jungles. Within these 
fastnesses their civilisations rise and fall in cycles beyond the ken of 

254



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Lizardman/Ophidian Attributes 

STR: 2d6+9 (16) Action Points 3 

CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d4 

SI1Z: 2d6+9 (16) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 6m 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 13 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Tough Scales. Warriors can 

wear any. 

CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities Cold Blooded, Night Sight 

Magic Specialists may practice 

Animism or Theism 

1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Tail 3/6 

4-5 Right Leg 3/6 

6-7 Left Leg 3/6 

8-10 Abdomen 3/7 

11-14 Chest 3/8 

15-16 Right Arm 3/5 

17-18 Left Arm 3/5 

19-20 Head 3/6 

other sapient species. Only when differing cultures are forced into 
cach other’s territory do folk begin to go missing, killed for trespass- 

Athletics 59%, Brawn 62%, Craft (Any primitive) 56%, Customs 56%, Endurance 
ing or taken for sacrifice; or perhaps worse still captured to be eaten, 

66%, Evade 56%, Insight 44%, Locale 66%, Perception 54%, Swim 69%, 
for the lizardmen are prone to cannibalism, and have a taste for 

Unarmed 59%, Willpower 52% 
human flesh. 

When not engaged in war, lizardmen often manufacture tools 
Passions 

and weapons, usually for trade or as sacrifices to the local gods and 
Loyalty to Tribe 90%, Hate Enemies 80% 

spirits. Ophidians on the other hand have more refined tastes, and 
craft art or scholarly works, their focus more being towards the sor- 

Combat Style & Weapons 
cerous or mystical talents. 

Lizardman Warrior (Stone Axe, Shortspear, Target Shield) 69% 
The following characteristics denote a lizardman. Ophidians 

have slightly different base characteristics, swapping the dice rolls 
Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

for STR with POW and SIZ with INT. They have two less Armour 
Bite M M 1d6+1d4 As for Head 

Points than lizardmen, but in exchange have the Venomous trait, 
injecting the poison with their bite. Substitute Craft with a suitable Claw M T 1d4+1d4 As for Arm 

Lore skill. Most ophidians know Folk Magic, and specialists study 
Tail M L 1d4+1d4 As for Tail 

Sorcery or Mysticism. 
Shortspear M L 1d8+1+1d4 4/5 

OPpHhIiDdIiaAnN VEenNoOmM 
Stone Axe M M 1d6+1+1d4 4/8 

Ophidian venom has a Potency of 70%. A victim must win an 
opposed roll of his Endurance against the Potency of the venom else Target Shield L S 1d3+1+1d4 4/9 

suffer the following symptoms. At the start of the round following 
being poisoned, the bitten location suffers the Agony condition, ren- MAaMmMmOoTtHh 
dering it unusable for the next 2d6 minutes, and possibly disrupting Pachyderms that thrive in colder climates, mammoths are con- 
any attempts at concentration or spell casting. One hour later the siderably larger and more dangerous than elephants. The MYTHRAS 
victim begins to suffer the combined effects of Hallucination and mammoth stands some three and a half metres at the shoulder. With 
Mania, developing a rabid fear of snakes. This effect lasts 2d6 days, its woolly, shaggy covering of fur, this immense beast is truly a sight 
during which time the victim grows increasingly paranoid until they to behold. 
must eventually be tied up for their own safety. After the poison sub- The tusks of the mammoth are extremely long with a distinct out- 
sides the victim will have no recollection of what bit them or how. ward bow and upward curve, making them both formidable weap- 

ons and highly prized sets of ivory. The skin and fur is extremely 
warm, and the layers of subcutaneous fat mean that, all in all, a 

255



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

mammoth is a much-hunted beast, especially amongst primitive cul- ELleEpPhHAaNnTtSs 
tures that share a similar climate to the mammoth’s herd territories. If an elephant is needed for a MYTHRAS game, the mammoth’s 

Mammoths, like elephants, live and move in herds of up to statistics are the obvious starting point. Reduce STR and SIZ by 10 
twenty creatures. All herd members will fight to protect themselves points to approximate the elephant’s smaller stature (they typically 
and their young. An enraged mammoth is not to be trifled with. weigh between 3 and 6 tons, compared with a mammoth’s 5 to 10 
Above and beyond their stampede and trampling ability, the vast tons). Elephants have shorter tusks, so reduce the Size to Huge and 
tusks and strong, probing trunk mean that mammoths are daunting Reach to Long. An elephant’s trunk is also longer than that of a 
opponents. mammoth, but there is no necessity to amend the trunk statistics 

Fur, on its own, is not enough to offer protection against the cold. from those given above. 
Mammoths also have a layer of subcutaneous fat up to a hand width The other obvious difference is that elephants are a tropical and 
deep. This fat is an important commodity for many cultures, just as sub-tropical species meaning that they lack both the fur and subcu- 
blubber is from whales. Where mammoths exist, one can therefore taneous fat of the mammoth. Reduce the elephant’s natural Armour 
guarantee industries, even primitive ones, to exploit the mammoth’s Points to 7 across all locations. 
natural resources. The Intimidate and Trample abilities remain the same, as do 

Mammoths attempt to trample first, taking advantage of their skills and Combat Styles. 
size and weight. If forced into close combat, the trunk is used to 
grip, and then hurl an opponent as far as possible (1d6+4 metres, 
with falling damage sustained by the victim). If the trunk cannot be MAaNnTtIiCcOoRrEe 
engaged, then the tusks are used to smash small opponents (such as A manticore is a wild beast, powerful, daring, as big as the largest 

humans) or gore larger ones. lion, its thick fur of a red colour like cinnabar. Its face however is not 
that of a wild beast but of a man, and it has three rows of teeth set 
in its upper jaw, and three in the lower; these are exceedingly sharp 

Mammoth Attributes 
and larger than the fangs of a hound. Its ears also resemble a man’s 

STR: 2d6+40 (47) Action Points 2 except that they are larger and shaggy; its eyes are blue-grey and 
CON: 2d6+24 (31) Damage Modifier ~ +2d10 they too are like a man’s, but its feet and claws are those of a lion. 
SIZ: 2d6+56 (63) Magic Points 11 To the end of its insectoid tail is attached the sting of a scorpion, 

DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 10m which might be over half a metre in length; and the tail has barbs 

INS: 2d6+4 (11) Initiative Bonus 11 at intervals on either side. The tip of the tail gives a fatal sting to 
anyone who encounters it, and death is immediate. The manticore 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Woolly pelt and hide 
can cast its barbs like arrows, by flicking its tail and shooting them a 

Abilities Intimidate, Trample 

Magic None 

1d20 Location 

1-2 Right Hind Leg 9/19 

3-4 Left Hind Leg 9/19 

5-8 Hindquarters 9/20 

9-12 Forequarters 9/21 

13-14 Right Front Leg 9/19 

15-16 Left Front Leg 9/19 

17 Trunk 9/18 

18-20 Head 9/19 

Athletics 58%, Brawn 130%, Endurance 92%, Evade 22%, Perception 52%, 

Willpower 52% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Trampling Doom (Trunk, Trample, Gore) 78% 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Trunk C VL 1d10+2d10 As for Trunk 

Tusks C VL 1d12+2d10 As for Head 

Trample C T 4d10 As for Leg 

256



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

great distance. Most creatures that the missile hits are killed due to itself. It has two remarkable features: the elongated forelimbs that 
the beast’s poison. These barbs replenish themselves constantly so are used to catch and hold prey immobile, and its extremely long 
that it rarely runs out of ammunition. and flexible thorax which permits amazing limb dexterity whilst the 

Manticora are all vicious predators feeding on whatever they can body remains static. Also of note is the insect’s field of vision. Its 
hunt, but for preference it will devour human beings; indeed it will massive compound eyes and neck articulation grant the mantis a 
slaughter a great number; utterly fearless, willingly ambushing two wide field of vision through 300 degrees, making it difficult to creep 
or even three men, and alone overcoming that number. As if this was up on from behind. 
not bad enough, a few are cursed with chaotic gifts which twist or Mantids are ambush hunters. The giant variety conceals itself 
deform them in some way, granting them wings for example. in foliage and branches, remaining motionless for extremely long 

Manticore venom has a Potency equal to the creature’s Endur- periods until suitable prey strays within range of its forelimbs. The 
ance. It takes effect 1 round after damage has been inflicted, and insects can fly, doing so mainly at night to move between hunting 
causes paralysis to 1d3 contiguous hit locations. If this affects the locations, and some mantids have distinct territories that are heavily 
chest the victim begins to asphyxiate and will die unless treated. defended. During mating season females are known to kill and eat 

their mates once copulation is complete. 
Consummate ambushers, manti wait, motionless, for prey to 

MAaNTnItSis,, GIiaAnNTt 
wander close enough for an attack which happens with frighten- 

At three metres in length, the giant praying mantis is a quite 
ing speed. Match the mantis’s Stealth against a victim’s Perception 
(remembering the Camouflage penalty) in an opposed roll to deter- 

Manticore Attributes mine the outcome of the ambush. 
STR: 2d6+15 (22) Action Points 3 The mantis strikes with its forelimbs first, automatically gripping 

CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier ~ +1d10 the prey if the attack is successful. If it wins a special effect it usually 

SIZ: 2d6+18 (25) Magic Points 11 selects Pin Weapon (if the opponent has a drawn weapon or held 
shield) or Kill Silently. On its next turn the victim is yanked back to 

DEX: 3d6+6 (17) Movement 10m 
the mantis which delivers a bite with its powerful mandibles, aiming 

INS: 2d6+7 (14) Initiative Bonus 16 
for the neck, chest or abdomen in a bid to quickly incapacitate. If a 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Fur, Mane and Chitin victim breaks free of the insect’s grip or the initial attack fails, then 
Abilities Frenzy, Leaper, Venomous the mantis will attempt to fly away and hunt something else. A man- 

tis will not try to ambush a creature that is clearly larger than itself. 
Magic None 

1d20 Location API/HP 

1-3 Tail 6/9 

4-5 Right Hind Leg 3/9 
Mantis, Giant Attributes 

6-7 Left Hind Leg 3/9 
STR: 2d6+6 (13) Action Points 3 

8-10 Hindquarters 3/10 

CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d4 
11-14 Forequarters 3/11 

SIZ: 2d6+12 (19) Magic Points 4 
15-16 Right Front Leg 3/9 

DEX: 2d6+18 (25) Movement 6m, 10m (Flying) 
17-18 Left Front Leg 3/9 

INS: 2d6+2 (9) Initiative Bonus 17 

19-20 Head 5/9 
POW: 1d6 (4) Armour Chitin 

Abilities Camouflaged, Flying, 

Grappler 
Athletics 69%, Brawn 61%, Endurance 72%, Evade 74%, Perception 65%, Stealth 

Magic None 
71%, Track 60, Willpower 62% 

1d20 Location AP/HP 

Combat Style & Weapons 1 Right Rear Leg 3/6 

Man Hunter (Bite, Claws, Barbs and Sting) 79% 2 Left Rear Leg 3/6 

3-4 Metathorax 3/8 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 5 Mid Right Leg 3/6 

Jaws M T 1d4+1d10 As for Head 6 Mid Left Leg 3/6 

Claws L M 1d6+1d10 As for Leg 7-10 Prothorax 3/9 

11-12 Right Wing 3/6 
Sting H L 1d8+1d10+Vencom  As for Leg 

13-14 Left Wing 3/6 
Flung Barbs L - 1d6+1d10+Venom 

15-16 Right Forelimb 3/6 

17-18 Left Forelimb 3/6 

formidable predator that feeds exclusively on creatures smaller than 19-20 Head 3/7 

257



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Minotaurs are much larger than humans. Males average well 
over two metres tall. They are powerful and massively built, with 

Athletics 78%, Brawn 72%, Endurance 56%, Evade 80%, Fly 68%, Perception 
a natural confidence and swagger amongst their own kind. Males 

53%, Stealth 74%, Willpower 48% 
are blessed with oversized horns, and proudly display battle scars 
as badges of honour. A few have the lower halves and the hoofed 

Combat Style & Weapons 
legs of bulls. Armour is rarely worn, more from the fact that none 

Unseen Death (Scything Limbs, Bite) 78% amongst their culture knows the art of smithing and salvaged war 
trophies rarely fit, rather than any philosophical attitudes towards it. 

Weapon Size /Force Reach Damage 
Their favoured weapons are great axes or two handed clubs, 

Forelimb L VL 1d6+1d4 As for Limb 
with which they delight in smashing opponents about. There is no 

Mandibles M M 1d4+1d4 As for Head doubting that minotaurs are tenacious fighters and have little trouble 
rising to aggression when the need calls for it. They are brave but 
merciless fighters, and believe in putting a foe down as quickly and 

MIiNnOoTtAaUuRr 
brutally as possible. When faced with chaos-tainted species, such as 

Bovine-headed and man-bodied, minotaurs are anthropomor- 
boar-kin and chaos hybrids, minotaurs show no mercy. They have 

phic hybrids of myth and legend. In the original Greek myth the 
an innate hatred of chaos and attempt to stamp it out whenever and 

minotaur was a single beast known also as Asterion, which dwelled 
wherever they can. 

in the labyrinth of Crete, beneath the palace of King Minos, where 
Socially most minotaurs tend to be bluff, gruff and taciturn 

it received regular sacrifices. 
with a reputation for being, at best, rude to other species and, at 
worst, outwardly aggressive. Some of this reputation comes with the 



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

struggle minotaurs have with human tongues. They can understand STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy 
them well enough, but speaking them is difficult. No minotaur can Minotaur characters begin the game with commodities or cur- 
speak a human tongue at higher than 50%, owing the sheer differ- rency worth 4d6 x20 silver pieces. 
ences in minotaur physiology and vocal dynamics. 

Minotaurs have a polygynous social structure. Males may take THhEe MIiNnOoTtAaUuRr VOoIiCcEe 
several wives and herd leaders always have a harem, which are won “These field and trails belong to the Buru-hrunz tribe andyou trespass. Are 
by demonstrating martial prowess and great deeds. Primarily vege- you want make us angry? We willf ight of have to, and my horns will drip your 

tarians, minotaurs consume vast amounts of fruits and wild grains blood, but we want you go now, so we not have to kill you. If you come to trade, 

every day, supplementing their diet with milk and cheese from their we happy to change goods but be quick about business. We have silver; bronze and 

herds. Minotaur warbands have been known to raid cattle herders want strong weapons and sharp tools. 

who move into a minotaur grazing areas, sparing only the cattle So? You challenge me? Or what? You flee, you trade or you die. Simple.’ 
(which they release) but massacring the herders. 

Several minotaur tribes live in close proximity to Meeros 
Minotaur Attributes 

although they maintain a respectful distance. Like the Meerish they 
revere Myceras, although they depict the War God as the primary STR: 3d6+6 (17) Action Points 2 

deity of their cosmology - the father of all other gods. CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d6 

They consider the Meerish pantheon to be a blasphemy against SIZ: 2d6+15 (22) Magic Points 11 

Myceras and do not recognise Meerish temples or rites. DEX: 2d6+3 (10) Movement 8m 

They do, however, recognise the bravery that Myceras’s warriors INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 12 
exhibit in battle and accord a level of respect to those who display 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Horns and Hide. Warriors 
courtesy and honour. 

may wear any armour 

MIiNnOoTtAaUuRr CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Intimidate, Trample 

More sociable minotaurs can make for excellent player charac- Magic Some herds may have 

ters as long as the limitations regarding language are remembered. specialist priests and shaman. 

Minotaurs are tough, proud and irascible, but they are also intelli- Sorcery tends to be shunned. 

gent and can even be compassionate when the time calls for it. How- 
ever if a party ever required a stoic, strong, silent, brute of a warrior, 1d20 Location AP/HP 

then nothing fits the bill quite like a minotaur. 1-3 Right Leg 0/7 

4-6 Left Leg 0/7 

CUuLlTtUuRrEe 79 Abdomen 0/8 
Minotaurs form small societies well away from standard humans. 10-12 Chest 0/9 

They rarely tend to rise above the level of a Barbarian culture, and 
13-15 Right Arm 0/6 

most are nomadic because their beliefs and behaviour are based on 
strength and survival rather than higher notions of art and social 16-18 Left Arm 0/6 

development. Since beasts of burden or wheeled vehicles are rarely 19-20 Head 3/7 

used, minotaur possessions are limited to what they carry them- 
selves. The Drive and Ride skills are redundant unless the minotaurs Skills 

are from a culture where giant riding or pack animals are readily 
Athletics 57%, Brawn 79%, Customs 66%, Endurance 66%, Evade 40%, Insight 

available. 44%, Locale 56%, Lore (Herding) 66%, Perception 54%, Unarmed 57%, 

Willpower 42% 
& Customs+40%, Native Tongue +40% 
& Standard Skills: Athletics, Brawn, Endurance, Influence, 

Combat Style & Weapons 
Locale, Perception, Unarmed 

& Example Combat Styles: Minotaur Warrior, Horned Ber- Minotaur Warrior (Two Handed Axe, Longspear used one handed, Hoplite Shield, 

Gore) 67% 
serker, Hoofed Hunter 

& Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (any primitive), Healing, 
Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Language (any), Lore (any), Navigation, Survival, Track 
Massive Axe E VL 2d8+2+1d6 6/12 

Long Spear H VL 1d10+1+1d6 4/10 
CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 

Hoplite Shield E M 1d4+1d6 6/15 
« Loyalty to Herd 
« Love (Freedom, Battle) Gore L M 1d8+1d6 As for Head 

& Hate (Chaos) 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsIioOnNSs 
Crafter, Farmer, Herder, Priest, Shaman, Warrior 

259



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

MuumMmMmmy Mummy Attributes 

STR: 3d6+9 (20) Action Points 2 

CON: 3d6+9 (20) Damage Modifier ~ +1d6 

SIZ: 2d6+6 (13) Magic Points 22 

DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 6m 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative 12 

POW: 1d6+18 (22) Armour As per original creature with 

bandages and burial armour. 

CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Imunity (Poison, Disease), Life 

Sense, Undead 

Magic Some may retain the magical 

skills possessed in life. 

1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Right Leg 2/7 

46 Left Leg 2/7 

79 Abdomen 2/8 

10-12 Chest 2/9 

13-15 Right Arm 2/6 

16-18 Left Arm 2/6 

19-20 Head 2/7 

Athletics 51%, Brawn 63%, Endurance 70%, Evade 42%, Perception 63%, 

Unarmed 71%, Willpower 84% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Vengeful Strangler (Hands) 71% 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

Hands S T 1d3+1d6 As for Arm 

otherwise they have no purpose or direction. In effect the sor- 
cerer ‘wears’ the body of the mummy as a proxy to perform 
some nefarious deed. 

& Guardian mummies are those inhabited and controlled by a 
spirit, which has been bound into the corpse. Depending on 
the type of spirit this means that these mummies are usually 
instinct-driven and have no real intelligence, merely a sub- 

Animated corpses, usually by sorcery or other magic, but some- conscious command which they are compelled to perform. 

times through sheer force of will, which have been subjected to & Vengeful mummies that self animate through sheer force of 

mummification processes to help preserve them in preparation for will are usually motivated to complete a specific act or task 

the afterlife. Mummies lack any functioning internal organs, and so denied to them during life. This might be revenge (on a mur- 

are essentially bone, sinew and desiccated flesh. Like most undead derer, say) or protecting their burial chattels. These fearsome 

this makes them naturally resilient to damage. mummies display the same intelligence they held in life. 

Mummies are, however, somewhat susceptible to fire. The ban- 
Mummy characteristics are based upon those of the original 

dages used in their preparation and the fluids used for embalming, 
creature, maintained intact by the act of preservation, and fur- 

are usually flammable. Any strike with a naked flame has a chance 
ther infused with an unnatural strength and vitality. They gain +2 

equal to the damage rolled of setting the creature alight. This means 
Armour Points due to the bandaging, and bonuses to STR and 

that the original damage continues to affect the hit location struck 
CON particular to the power of the magic or spirit animating them. 

cach round until extinguished, and also spreads to one adjacent hit 
The INT, POW and CHA of the mummy are based upon what 

location every round inflicting further damage. 
spirit or will currently animates it. The following statistics are for a 

There are three main types of Mummies: 
human mummy of average physical characteristics, but which has 

& Marionette mummics animated through sorcery are mere been possessed by its ancient, former soul (treated as an Intensity 3 

automatons which need to be actively controlled by the caster, Undeath Spirit). 

260



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Unless buried or armed with a weapon, human mummies typi- and in these gigantic varieties the venom is a threat to large species. 
cally attempt to grapple their opponents in close quarters (see Grap- Couple this with their ability to squirt ink, change the colour of their 
pling page 106). When possible they use the Choose Location (head) skin, regenerate tentacles, propel themselves at great speeds through 
to grab their victim’s throat and begin strangling, continuing to exert the water, and to squeeze into and through very small spaces, and 
damage each turn whilst simultaneously asphyxiating them. the giant octopus becomes a formidable predator. 

An octopus is also an intelligent creature with excellent prob- 
lem solving abilities. When attacking prey, such as creatures in boats 

OccTtoorpuuss,, GIiaAnNTt 
or creatures in the water, they are selective, and capable of using 

These monstrous cephalopods may well be the source of 
as wide a range of combat Special Effects as any sapient species, 

sea-monster tales. The giant species can range in size from the aver- 
despite having the INS characteristic. 

age 10 metre arm span of the example provided below, to colossal 
Octopuses may use their tentacles to parry attacks, using the 

monsters which can attack ships. 
squidgy limbs to entangle weapons in their grip, forcing wielders to 

Octopuses have several offensive and defensive mechanisms. 
wrestle them free with opposed Brawn rolls. Any gripped opponent 

Their eight tentacles, lined with suction cups, allow them a huge 
is either crushed in-situ or drawn towards the beak, whereupon the 

range of movement and actions; also all octopuses are venomous, 
octopus bites into the creature and injects venom with a Potency 

Octopus, Giant Attributes equal to the octopus’s Endurance. The venom paralyses the affected 
STR: 2d6+15 (22) Action Points 6 (Multi-limbed) area within one Combat Round, and then spreads to the rest of the 

CON: 2d6+12 (19) Damage Modifier ~ +1d10 body 1d3+3 rounds later. It then feeds on the paralysed specimen at 

SIZ: 2d6+21(28) Magic Points 7 leisure, dragging it into the depths. 

DEX: 2d6+15 (22) Movement 2m (land), 8m (water) 

INS: 2d6+7 (14) Initiative Bonus 18 OGgRrEe 
The term ogre refers to any giant race of ugly, bad tempered 

POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Blubbery Skin 
humanoid. Smaller than true giants but every bit as mean — if not 

Abilities Camouflaged, Formidable 
meaner — ogres tend to keep to themselves, living in hilly or forested 

Natural Weapons, Grappler, 
regions where they make their primitive settlements. Ogres even dis- 

Multi-Limbed, Regeneration 
like their own species: their sour temperaments making for solitary, 

(can grow back lost tentacles 
bile-filled individuals. A few may be cursed by chaos, but such indi- 

at its Healing Rate in Hit 
viduals are rare. 

Points per day), Swimmer, 
Whilst sapient, they have limited intellects and maintain a very 

Venomous 
primitive world-view. Many are so stupid they have reverted to bes- 

Magic None, thankfully. 
tiality and no longer understand speech. They make clothing for 
themselves but weapons and armour are either scavenged or rela- 

1d20 Location AP/HP 
tively simple (leathers, stone, wood) or improvised (such as the pro- 

01-02 Tentacle 1 1/10 
verbial ogre club — nothing more than a fashioned heavy branch or 

03-04 Tentacle 2 1/10 lump of stone fastened to a long haft). 

05-06 Tentacle 3 1/10 

07-08 Tentacle 4 1/10 Minotaur Attributes 

09-10 Tentacle 5 1/10 STR: 2d6+12(19) Action Points 2 

11-12 Tentacle 6 1/10 CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 

SIZ: 2d6+18 (25) Magic Points 11 
13-14 Tentacle 7 1/10 

DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 8m 
15-16 Tentacle 8 1/10 

INT: 2d6+3 (10) Initiative Bonus 8 (includes Initiative Penalty) 
17-18 Body 1/12 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Scraps of Fur and Leather 
19-20 Head 1/11 

CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities None 

Magic Sapient ogres may know some 

Folk Magic or Animism 
Athletics 87%, Brawn 80%, Endurance 68%, Evade 74%, Perception 61%, Stealth 

76%, Swim 71%, Willpower 54% 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Right Leg 2/9 
Combat Style & Weapons 

46 Left Leg 2/9 
Writhing Doom (Tentacles, Beak) 84% 

79 Abdomen 2/10 

10-12 Chest 2/11 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 13-15 Right Arm 2/8 

Tentacles H VL 1d8+1d10 As for Tentacle 16-18 Left Arm 2/8 

19-20 Head 2/9 
Beak M T 1d6+1d10 As for Head 

261



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

their territories. Hit and run techniques are preferred to toe to toe 
Skills 

slugging matches. 
Athletics 50%, Brawn 84%, Endurance 62%, Evade 42%, Locale 40%, Perception 

The Panthotaurs of Anathaym’s world inhabit the savannahs 
38%, Survival 53%, Track 56%, Unarmed 60%, Willpower 42% 

of the northern region, bordering the realm of the Badoshi. They 
revere the Sun Goddess Ar-Aya and, being master mathemeticians 

Combat Style & Weapons 
have built vast, stepped pyramids in her honour. Pictured below is 

Big, Hitty Things (Club) 70% 
one of the high priestesses of the Pantheris. Her collar is symbolic of 
her relationship with the sun, and marks her as a formidable theist 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage magician. 
Immense Club E VL 2d8+1d8 4/10 

PaAnNTthHOoTtaAuURr CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs 
Highly intelligent ogres may subjugate tribes of lesser human- Panthotaurs can be used as player characters — although their 

oids in order to use them as slaves, or send them forth to gather solitary natures may make some aspects of integration with human 
food (although more bestial ones often face the opposite situation of characters difficult. The most social are the Leonitaurs (Lions) owing 
being captured and used as savage pets). Ogres have a reputation for to their innate social organization. Tigrisotaurs (Tigers) tend to be 
cannibalism and a taste for human flesh. This is true: they will eat the most solitary. 
whatever they can catch, and they seem to delight in catching other 
sapient species for torment and tastiness. CUuLlTtUuRrEe 

Female ogres seem to be smarter and more conniving than their Panthotaurs live in pride-like, Barbarian-level societies often 

male counterparts, being very much the brains of the relationship. matriarchal in nature. The males are typically hunters and warriors, 

This assumes, of course, that ogres form meaningful and last- but dealings with other species are handled by the females. 

ing relationships. Fables and legends often pair ogres together in 
& Customs+40%, Native Tongue+40% 

marriage which indicates that, whilst solitary, finding a partner is 
& Standard Skills: Athletics, Brawn, Endurance, Influence, 

advantageous. 
Locale, Perception, Unarmed 

& Example Combat Styles: Panthotaur Warrior, Clawed Assas- 
PaAnNTthHOoTtaAuURr sin, Silent Hunter 

These creatures are a lean combination of & Professional Skills: Commerce, Craft (any Bar- 
a human with the furred head, abdomen, barian), Healing, Language (any), Lore (any), 
legs, tail and retractable claws of a large Stealth, Survival, Track 
cat — either a lion, tiger, leopard, panther 
or jaguar. Panthotaurs retain their big cat 

CUuLlTtuURrAaLl PAaSssIioOnNSs 
ferocity and cunning and, in the case of 
lion panthotaurs, social behaviour by & Loyalty to Pride 
forming prides. Otherwise they exhibit & Love (Freedom, Hunting) 
near-human sapience. Visually they are & Hate (Chaos) 
beautiful to behold, parts of their body 
covered with a fine fur that matches 

PRrOoFfEeSsSsIioOnNSs 
the feline they are related to. 

Agent (females), Crafter, Hunter, 
Their different psychologies and 

Priest, Shaman, Warrior 
dictary requirements mean that 
panthotaurs do not mix easily with 

STtaARrTtIinNgG MOoNnEeYy 
humans and so remain apart from Panthotaur characters 
them. Occasionally humans might begin the game with commod- 
find themselves as prey but, gener- ities or currency worth 4d6 
ally, panthotaurs opt for smaller x40 silver pieces. 
game and give humans a wide- 
berth. Panthotaurs are territorial, 

occupying lands similar to their 
animal cousins (jungles, bush and 
savannah), and may even command 
prides or solitary individuals of their beast 
brethren. 

Armed with effective natural weapons 
and incredible agility, these creatures 
rarely use armour or even weapons 
beyond a simple sling or spear. 
Rather they use speed and 
stealth to hunt and defend 



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

the location. After a further hour the venom slowly breaks down the 
Panthotaur Attributes 

tissue, causing the location to additionally lose 1 Hit Point per hour, 
STR: 3d6+6 (17) Action Points 3 

which normally results in the loss of the limb (or death of the victim 
CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier — +1d4 if head or torso) unless the poison is successfully treated. If desired 
SIZ: 3d6+6 (17) Magic Points 11 the Games Master may substitute this venom with another, as the 
DEX: 2d6+12 (19) Movement 8m effects of giant scorpion venom can run a huge gamut of different 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 15 (includes Initiative Penalty) effects depending on its species (see Poisons page 74 to create new 
ones). 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Fur and Leather Kilt 
Scorpions have incredibly resilient physiologies allowing them 

CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities Intimidate, Night Sight 
to survive the most extreme environmental conditions ranging from 

Magic Specialists can learn any intense cold to extreme heat. Games Masters may therefore want 
magical discipline. to grant giant scorpions the Immunity (Cold) and Immunity (Heat) 

abilities - extending these even to resisting magical forms. 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Right Leg 1/6 
Scorpion, Giant Attributes 

4-6 Left Leg 1/6 STR: 2d6+12(19) Action Points 3 
7-9 Abdomen 2/7 

CON: 3d6+6 (17) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 
10-12 Chest 1/8 

SIZ: 2d6+15 (22) Magic Points 4 
13-15 Right Arm 1/5 

DEX: 2d6+9 (16) Movement 8m 
16-18 Left Arm 1/5 

INS: 2d6+2 (9) Initiative Bonus 13 
19-20 Head 1/6 

POW: 1d6 (4) Armour Chitin 

Abilities Adhering, Burrowing, 

Formidable Natural Weapons, 
Athletics 66%, Brawn 54%, Endurance 56%, Evade 78%, Locale 56%, Perception 

Venomous 
64%, Stealth 72%, Survival 54%, Track 56%, Unarmed 76%, Willpower 52% 

Magic None 

Combat Style & Weapons 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

Panthotaur Warrior (Sling, Spear) 76% 
01-02 Tail 6/8 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 03 Right Rear Leg 6/7 

Bite M T 1d4+1d4 As for Head 04 Left Rear Leg 6/7 

Claw M M 1d6+1d4 As for Arm 05 Mid Right Leg 6/7 

Shortspear M L 1d8+1+1d4 4/5 06 Mid Left Leg 6/7 

Sling L - 1d8+1d4 1/2 07 Fore Right Leg 6/7 

08 Tore Left Leg 6/7 

SCcOoRrPpIiOoNn,, GIiaAnNTt 09-12 Thorax 6/9 

Larger than a full grown human, giant scorpions are found 
13-15 Right Pincer 6/8 

mostly in hot, arid climates where they make their nests in caves and 
burrows, but they are natural survivors and can be found in almost 16-18 Left Pincer 6/8 

any climate. 19-20 Cephalothorax 6/10 

Scorpions have eight legs, two enlarged pincers, a long curved 
tail that finishes with a venom sac and stinger, and a segmented body Skills 
with natural armour plating. They are generally nocturnal, opportu- 

Athletics 65%, Brawn 71%, Endurance 64%, Evade 72%, Perception 53%, Stealth 
nistic predators that wait for passing prey to stray into range of their 

65%, Willpower 48% 
pincers. Whilst voracious and capable of eating large amounts in 
one sitting, they can also go without food for long spans of time. The Combat Style & Weapons 
scorpion lacks a discernible head, with its eyes, mouth and other 

Scuttling Horror (Sting, Pincers) 75% 
sensory organs located in the cephalothorax. The mouth consists 
of a pair of extremely sharp mandibles that can tear through tough Size/Force Reach Damage 

skin or armour. 
Pincer H L 1d8+1d8 As for Pincer 

The giant species has few natural predators, placing it at the top 
of its local food chain. Its venom, tough exoskeleton, and ability to Sting L VL 1d6+1d8+Venom As for Tail 

rapidly retreat to its burrow or cave makes capturing one of these 
scuttling arthropods difficult and risky. 

Scorpion venom has a Potency equal to the creature’s Endur- 
ance. It acts on the next round after injection and inflicts Agony on 

263



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

SeEaA SEerRpPeEnNTt ShHAaRrKk 
Colossal denizens of deep water — both fresh and salt — sea Sharks are consummate predators which roam the waters search- 

serpents are vast, serpentine creatures equipped with fins, a head ing for prey and are merciless in its pursuit. They will attack any- 
that is small in comparison with its body and an undulating motion thing that is helpless or panicking in the water, and are extremely 
through the water that results in a humped appearance when the sensitive to blood, allowing them to home in on prey from many 
body breaks the surface. For the most part they feed in the depths but kilometres away. 
may come to the surface to attack boats if disturbed. Once a shark tastes blood it does not stop in its attacks. Driving 

Hungry sea serpents that encounter vessels generally pluck up a a shark away is exceedingly difficult and, by the time one shark has 
few sailors, swallowing them whole until their appetite is satisfied. been deterred, another half dozen may have already arrived to join 
Some clever captains will leave livestock (or perhaps unwitting pas- the feast. 
sengers) on deck to feed a known monster in the hope it will depart 
peaceably. However, if harmed or driven to anger the creature will Shark Attributes 

reduce a ship to driftwood, drowning most of its crew in the process. STR: 2d6+18 (25) Action Points 3 

Killing such a monster is near impossible given its size and its abil- 
CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier ~ +2d6 

ity to plunge back into the depths to flee an overwhelming attack 
SIZ: 2d6+35 (42) Magic Points 7 

against it. 
DEX: 2d6+9 (16) Movement 12m (Swim) 

Sea Serpent Attributes INS: 2d6+3 (10) Initiative Bonus 13 

STR: 2d6+30 (37) Action Points 3 POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Thick Hide 

CON: 2d6+18 (25) Damage Modifier ~ +2d10 Abilities Blood Sense, Frenzy, 

SIZ: 2d6+60 (67) Magic Points 11 Swimmer 

DEX: 2d6+12 (19) Movement 8m (Swim) Magic None 

INS: 2d6+3 (10) Initiative Bonus 15 
1d20 Location API/HP 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Scales 
1-3 Tail 2/12 

Abilities Engulfing, Swimmer, 

Terrifying 4-6 Dorsal Fin 2/11 

Magic None 7-10 Hindquarters 2/13 

11-14 Torequarters 2/14 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

15-16 Right Fin 2/11 
1-3 Tail 6/19 

17-18 Left Fin 2/11 
4-5 Right Hind Fin 6/18 

19-20 Head 2/12 
6-7 Left Hind Fin 6/18 

8-10 Hindquarters 6/20 

11-14 Forequarters 6/21 Brawn 87%, Endurance 62%, Evade 52%, Perception 57%, Swim 81%, Willpower 

34% 
15-16 Right Front Fin 6/18 

17-18 Left Front Fin 6/18 Combat Style & Weapons 

19-20 Head 6/19 Jaws (Bite) 81% 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 
Skills 

Brawn 124%, Endurance 90%, Evade 58%, Perception 51%, Stealth 59%, Swim Bite E M 1d10+2d6 As for Head 

82%, Willpower 52% 

Combat Style & Weapons 
SkKEelLeEtToOnN 

Scourge of the Sea (Bite and Tail) 86% Skeletons are the remains of dead creatures whose flesh has 
long rotted away, which are subsequently animated through magic. 

Size/ Force Reach Damage 
Any kind of skeleton can be animated, and need not specifically be 

Bite C VL 1d12+2d10 As for Head bones, as even the empty husks of giant insects can be raised from 

Tail Bash C VL 1d10+2d10 As for Tail their rest. 
They are susceptible to weapons delivering blunt-trauma, which 

smashes the bone (or chitin), and disrupts the joints. Such weapons 
increase their damage dice by one step when used against skeletons 
(for example a club with 1d6 damage would become 1d8). On the 
other hand skeletons are resistant to slashing and thrusting weapons. 

264



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

strength of the animating magic), and DEX is increased by half 
Skeleton Attributes 

again — but never higher than the maximum for the species. The 
STR: 12 Action Points 3 

INT, POW and CHA of the skeleton are based upon the caster’s 
CON: 12 Damage Modifier =~ None own or the spirit that currently animates it. 
SIZ: 13 Magic Points 16 The skill values of the skeleton are equal to those of its control- 
DEX: 16 Movement 6m ler. For sorcerers and priests this is straight forward, but the skills 

INT: 11 Initiative Bonus 14 of skeletons raised by animism are dependent on the spirit. Skele- 
tons can wear armour, and wield any weapons they would naturally 

POW: 16 Armour None 
have in their previous life. The following statistics are for an average 

Abilities Undead 
human skeleton which has been possessed by an Intensity 2 Spirit 

Magic None of Undeath (see page 153). All calculations have been factored in. 
It is rumoured that the teeth of certain creatures, cursed with 

Chaos or undeath, can be buried and, with the right incantations, 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

emerge from the ground as murderous skeletons of their host form. 
1-3 Right Leg 0/5 

Of course this may simply be a myth used to terrify Meerish chil- 
46 Left Leg 0/5 

dren into cleaning their own teeth properly. Or it may have some- 
7-9 Abdomen 0/6 

thing to do with a spell formula found in the infamous Death Scrolls 
10-12 Chest 0/7 of Bhast. 
13-15 Right Arm 0/4 

16-18 Left Arm 0/4 SlLaArRgGrR 
19-20 Head 0/5 A hulking, bad-tempered, bipedal lizard, slargr inhabit forests 

and swamps and establish extensive hunting grounds, targeting 

Skills any creature smaller than themselves for food. Although omnivo- 

Athletics 68%, Brawn 45%, Endurance 44%, Evade 72%, Perception 57%, rous, slargr prefer fresh, raw meat; and despite their size are skil- 

Unarmed 68%, Willpower 72% ful yet silent ambush hunters. Their mottled grey-green skin offers 
excellent camouflage in the slargr’s natural habitat making surprise 

Combat Style & Weapons attacks common. Rather strangely, the scales which cover them are 

Skeletal Warrior (Sword, Spear, Peltast Shield) 68% thicker on the arms and head, but grow gradually thinner towards 
its tail, making it more vulnerable from the rear. 

Size/ Force Reach Damage Although they appear slow and dull-witted, they are anything 

Shortspear M L 1d8+1 4/5 but. Slargr are intelligent. Their vast, clawed hands make all but the 
simplest brute tools difficult to use, but the beasts employ rocks, tree 

Peltast Shield L S 1d4 4/12 

Shortsword M S 1d6 6/8 
Slargr Attributes 

STR: 2d6+15 (22) Action Points 2 
Reduce the damage dice of slashing weapons by one step, and 
thrusting weapons by two steps. CON: 2d6+12 (19) Damage Modifier ~ +1d10 

Similar to mummies there are several types of skeletons depend- SIZ: 2d6+18 (25) Magic Points 11 

ing on the type of magic used to animate them: DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 6m 

INT: 2d6+4 (11) Initiative Bonus 12 
& Those animated through sorcery are automatons which must 

be actively controlled by the caster, otherwise they lapse into POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Tough Scales 

quiescence. Although powerful sorcerers can control several CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities Blood Sense, Camouflaged, 
skeletons simultaneously their usefulness is limited by the con- Formidable Natural Weapons, 

centration required to direct them. Grappler 

& Skeletons raised by theism have the benefit that it is the Magic None 

supernatural entity being channelled by the priest who con- 
trols them. This can often grant the undead a semblance of 1d20 Location AP/HP 
independent action, though their skills are dependent on the 1-3 Tail 2/9 
nature of the deity or demon called upon. 

4-5 Right Hind Leg 3/9 
& Animists can send undeath spirits to possess the bones of dead 

6-7 Left Hind Leg 3/9 
creatures, granting the skeleton mental characteristics, and a 

8-10 Abdomen 3/10 
degree of free will. This strength is also a weakness since the 
animating spirit can be blocked, exorcised or destroyed by 11-14 Chest 3/11 

magic which specifically targets such entities. 15-16 Right Arm 4/8 

17-18 Left Arm 4/8 
Skeleton characteristics are based upon those of the original 

19-20 Head 4/9 
creature, but modified to reflect the loss of flesh and muscle. Their 

19-20 Head 4/9 
STR and CON are halved (but receive bonuses according to the 

265



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Skills Smilodon Attributes 

Athletics 55%, Brawn 77%, Endurance 68%, Evade 46%, Perception 62%, Track STR: 2d6+15 (22) Action Points 3 

70%, Stealth 64%, Willpower 52% 
CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d12 

SIZ: 2d6+25 (32) Magic Points 7 
Combat Style & Weapons 

DEX: 2d6+9 (16) Movement 8m 
Slargr Hunter (Claws, Jaws and Tail) 75% 

INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 15 

Weapon Size/ Force Reach Damage POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Fur and Hide 

Bite L S 1d8+1d10 As for Head Abilities Intimidate, Leaper, Night 

Sight 
Claws L M 1d8+1d10 As for Arm 

Magic None 
Thail L L 1d6+1d10 As for Tail 

1d20 Location AP/HP 
branches and other natural resources to aid in their hunting and 

1-2 Right Hind Leg 2/9 
even dig spike-lined death pits to aid in catching larger prey. 

Slargr are, generally, solitary creatures. Intensely protective 34 Left Hind Leg 2/9 

of their hunting territories, slargr cannot abide sharing with even 57 Hindquarters 2/10 
their own kind. Companionship is sought for mating purposes only, 

8-10 Torequarters 2/11 
and this happens once a year when the females become fertile and 
develop a pinkish-red sheen to their skin indicating a readiness to 11-13 Right Front Leg 2/9 

mate. At this time males compete in fights to the death for mating 14-16 Left Front Leg 2/9 
privileges, something the females encourage to ensure they will cou- 

17-20 Head 2/9 
ple with the strongest male specimen they can. 

Ostensibly bipedal, slargr will revert to all-fours when giving 
chase, thereby improving their speed. In combat they use their mass 
to overwhelm opponents, and a favoured tactic when dealing with Athletics 78%, Brawn 84%, Endurance 66%, Evade 52%, Perception 50%, Track 

weapon-using prey is to disarm the opponent first (especially shields) 66%, Stealth 69%, Willpower 44% 

before bludgeoning and rending with claws and teeth. It has been 
Combat Style & Weapons 

known for humans to reason with slargr — persuading them to pur- 
sue better or larger prey — but such opportunities are rare. A hungry Smilodon Ambush (Teeth, Claws) 78% 

slargr has only one, driving desire, and it is not to enter into polite 
Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 

discourse. 
The cover of this book depicts a typical adult slargr. The creature Bite H M 1d10+1d12 As for Head 

has been stalking Anathaym for some time before making a fero- Claws L M 1d8+1d12 As for Leg 

cious, unexpected attack. 
by crushing the windpipe, a task made easier if the prey has 

SmMIilLoOdDoOnN been surprised, stabbed and then crushed under smilodon’s 
weight. 

Often known as sabre-toothed tigers, although 
Smilodon hunt in small family packs of 

this is a misnomer, these big cats are noted for 
X .\\,\\ between three and eight animals, although 

both their intimidating physical size and pro- 
> lone smilodon are also known. Their pow- 

nounced canine fangs which arch 
-3 erful forelimbs mean they are excellent 

down well below the lower jaw 
climbers, and so they make use of any 

and average around 30 centi- 
naturally high terrain to ambush their 

metres in length. Smilodon are 
incredibly robust and strong prey. 

when compared with other 
big cats — especially in their SNnAaKkEe,, GIiaAnNTt 
forequarters. The largest naturally occurring large 

Built for power rather snakes (the constrictors, such as the 
than speed, they are ambush python and anaconda) can reach huge 
hunters, using height to leap lengths. This entry describes snakes of 
down on their prey, combin- a more monstrous scale that are capable 
ing the delivery of a stabbing of swallowing prey whole and are truly 
downward thrust with their terrifying in their appearance. The vast 
incisors together with the bulk of giant snakes are non-venomous: 
impact of their sheer bulk they rely on their size and strength to 
to overwhelm their victims. catch and then kill prey without the 
Death is usually delivered need to poison it for incapacitation. Of 



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

course, for added horror, giant snakes can be made venomous as a creature of up to their own size. It takes one day per point of SIZ 
well. to fully digest the meal. 

Snakes can adapt to most habitats although, being cold-blooded, Whether they strike from ambush or hold mesmerised victims 
they are sluggish in cooler climes. They can be found anywhere from motionless whilst they approach, constrictors loop prey with their 
deserts to jungles; forests to mountains. Wherever there is enough coils and wind themselves tight, cutting off circulation and air, suffo- 
prey, giant snakes may not be far removed. All giant snakes are either cating and crushing the victim. Once the prey is dead or unconscious 
camouflaged for their environment or possess the ability to mesmer- it is swallowed whole, and digested over a long period, meaning that 
ise their prey. However, even the most brightly patterned serpents snakes can take considerable periods between meals. Escaping from 
can be difficult to detect, and because snakes often remain motion- a giant constrictor’s coils is a monumental feat requiring an opposed 
less and silent for many hours, stumbling into a snake’s path is not test of Brawn skills. 
difficult to do. Giant constrictors with the ability to mesmerise must engage 

All snakes have the inherent ability to unhinge their jaws in order the target in direct eye contact, which prompts an opposed roll of 
to ingest subdued or slain prey. However since most serpents have Willpower skills. If the victim loses, they remain motionless, unable 
a rather small head in proportion to their body length, and must to react or save themselves. The first attack of the snake against 
spend hours swallowing victim, they do not receive the Engulfing a surprised or mesmerised target (if it generates a Special Effect) 
ability in combat. Despite this minor restriction, a snake can swallow will target the chest or abdomen. No damage is inflicted but the 

attack automatically establishes a grapple. On the snake’s next turn, 
it inflicts its Damage Modifier by tightening its coils applying the 
damage to the Chest or Abdomen area directly: armour does not 

Snake, Giant Attributes 
protect against this constriction damage. Giant snakes usually keep 

STR: 3d6+9 (20) Action Points 3 
their heads out of combat unless outnumbered by opponents. 

CON: 3d6+12 (23) Damage Modifier ~ +2d6 

SIZ: 3d6+30 (41) Magic Points 7 
SPpIidDEeRr,, GIiaAnNTt 

DEX: 2d6+12 (19) Movement 8m 
Even hardened adventurers can harbour arachnophobia — the 

INS: 2d6+5 (12) Initiative Bonus 16 
fear of spiders — which makes the giant variety even more terrifying. 

POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Scales Giant spiders are excellent predators, using all manner of ingenious 

Abilities Camouflaged or Gaze Attack methods of luring and trapping prey. Whether they use concealed 

(Mesmerism), Cold Blooded, burrows (trap-door spiders), sticky webs, or are fast running hunt- 

Grappler er-killers; spiders are cunning, patient and deadly. When using a 

Magic None giant spider, decide how it hunts and use the appropriate combat 
techniques described here to run the encounter. 

1d20 Location AP/HP All giant spiders have the ability to adhere to vertical surfaces. 

1-3 Tail Tip 4/13 This means they can squat on a cave ceiling and cling to or scurry up 
a wall at great speed. They have excellent vibratory, as well as visual 

A=) Mid End-length 4/13 
perception, through the hairs on their legs, making them difficult to 

67 Tore End-length 4/13 sneak up upon unless care is taken to move extremely slowly, and not 

8-9 Rear Mid-length 4/14 disturb the silken trip lines which surround their lairs. 
Spiders pinion prey with one or more of their legs before biting 

10-12 Mid Mid-length 4/14 
with their mandibles. Provided the bite penetrates any armoun, it 

13-14 Tore Mid-length 4/14 injects venom into the victim, which has a Potency equal to the spi- 

15-16 Rear Tore-length 4/13 der’s Endurance. Games Masters are free to develop their own poi- 
sons for particular species, but as a default use the following toxin. 

17-18 Mid Fore-length 4/13 
Generic spider poison acts 1d6 rounds after injection (during 

19-20 Head 4/13 which time the spider either retreats or maintains its grip), and 
paralyses the victim if not resisted. Once immobile the spider will 
wrap the victim in silk. Paralysis lasts for a number of hours equal to 

Athletics 79%, Brawn 91%, Endurance 66%, Evade 68%, Perception 59%, Stealth one quarter of the spider’s CON. However, the venom has a more 
71%, Willpower 54% deadly secondary effect. Each hour after the initial poisoning, the 

victim loses 1 Hit Point from every location as his insides begin to 
Combat Style & Weapons liquefy. This continues until the victim is dead. 
Crushing Death (Constrict, Bite and Writhe) 79% Spider silk is incredibly strong and sticky: treat a silk binding or 

a strand of web as having 6 Armour Points, and Hit Points equal to 
Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage half the spider’s SIZ. Touching an adhesive web glues the limb to 

Bite H VL 1d8+2d6 As for Head the strand, unless the victim can win an opposed roll of their Brawn 
against the silk’s Stickiness (equal to the spider’s Endurance). If this 

Constrict E T 2d6 As for Segment 
fails they remain fastened, unable to break free by strength alone. 

Tail Slap E VL 1d6+2d6 As for Tail Attempting to cut free exposes the tool or weapon used to the same 
process. Despite popular belief, spider webs are not flammable, but 

267



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Athletics 80%, Brawn 69%, Endurance 64%, Evade 80%, Perception 53%, Stealth 

69%, Willpower 48% 

Combat Style & Weapons 

Eight Legged Horror (Legs, Mandibles) 80% 

Size/Force Reach Damage 

Mandibles L T 1d6+1d10 As for Head 

Legs L VL Grapple As for Leg 

a character might slowly burn their way through a web by using a 
flame to shrivel the strands (fire damage ignores the silk’s Armour 
Points). 

Some spiders are capable of leaping disturbingly long distances 
using their powerful musculature. If designing spiders that are hunt- 
er-killers, grant them the Leaping ability to reflect this method of 
chasing down prey. 

TIigGeErR 
With the exception of smilodon, tigers are the largest of the big 

cats. Highly territorial and generally solitary (save for females with 
cubs) they frequent many different climates including arctic envi- 
ronments. Their natural camouflage, usually with the characteris- 
tic black stripes, means they can move with high stealth, increasing 
their ambush capabilities. The pattern of stripes is unique to each 
tiger, and helps the animals to conceal themselves amongst the shad- 
ows, foliage and long grass as they stalk their prey. 

Spider, Giant Attributes The chief means of attack is the powerful bite, followed by claw 
STR: 3d6+9 (20) Action Points 3 rakes. A hungry tiger is tenacious and will stalk prey for a great dis- 
CON: 3d6+6 (17) Damage Modifier  +1d10 tance if driven by an empty stomach. They are undeterred by prey 
SIZ: 3d6+18 (29) Magic Points 4 larger themselves although tbese cats are still cautious given .that - 

generally - they do not hunt in large numbers, and have little in the 
DEX: 3d6+9 (20) Movement 10m 

way of support. 
INS: 2d6+2 (9) Initiative Bonus 15 

POW: 1d6 (4) Armour Exoskeleton Attributes 
STR: 2d6+15 (22) Action Points 3 

Abilities Adhering, Earth Sense, 
Grappler, Venomous CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +1d10 

Magic None SIZ: 2d6+18 (25) Magic Points 7 

DEX: 2d6+12 (19) Movement 8m 

1d20 Location AP/HP INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 16 

01-02 Right Rear Leg 4/9 POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Fur and Hide 

03-04 Left Rear Leg 4/9 Abilities Camouflage, Intimidate, 

05-06 Mid Right Leg 4/9 Night Sight 
. Magic None 

07-08 Mid Left Leg 4/9 

09-10 Fore Right Leg 9 1d20 Location APIHP 
11-12 Tore Left Leg 4/9 1-2 Right Hind Leg 2/8 

13-14 Abdomen 4/12 34 Left Hind Leg 2/8 

15-16 Tront Right Leg 4/9 5-7 Hindquarters 2/9 

17-18 Tront Left Leg 4/9 8-10 Torequarters 2/10 

19-20 Cephalothorax 4/11 11-13 Right Front Leg 2/8 

14-16 Left Front Leg 2/8 

17-20 Head 2/8 

268



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

TroLlLl DAaRrKkNnEeSsSs BOoNnDd TAaBbLlEe 
Athletics 71%, Brawn 68%, Endurance 66%, Evade 68%, Perception 60%, Track 

56%, Stealth 72%, Willpower 54% 1d100 Bond Srength 

Very weak bond. Troll can function without hindrance in slightly 

Combat Style & Weapons 01-20 overcast conditions. Lesser cloud cover inflicts one level of Fatigue. 

Striped Death (Teeth, Claws) 81% Weak bond. Troll can function without hindrance in completely 

21-40 overcast conditions. Lesser cloud cover inflicts three levels of 
Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage Tatigue. 

Bite L S 1d8+1d10 As for Head 4160 Average bond. Troll incurs five levels of Fatigue in any form of 

daylight, no matter the cloud cover. 
Claws L M 1d6+1d10 As for Leg 

- Strong bond. As above, but the troll also suffers 1 Hit Point of 

damage to every location per hour. 

Troll 81-00 Very strong bond. Any form of daylight petrifies the troll in 1d6+4 

Rounds. 

Attributes 

STR: 3d6+9 (20) Action Points 2 

CON: 3d6+6 (17) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 

SIZ: 3d6+12 (23) Magic Points 11 

DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 8m 

INT: 2d6+3 (10) Initiative Bonus 11 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Tough, Warty Hide 

CHA: 2d6 (7) Abilities Dark Sight, Immunity 

(Mundane Weapons) 

Magic Some trolls know Folk Magic 

48% (Darkness or Extinguish, 

plus 1d3 others) 

1d20 Location AP/HP 

1-3 Right Leg 3/8 

46 Left Leg 3/8 

79 Abdomen 3/9 

10-12 Chest 3/10 

13-15 Right Arm 3/7 

16-18 Left Arm 3/7 
Having their roots in Scandinavian folklore, #oll was originally a 

pejorative term for the joinar, or giants. In time it has come to refer 19-20 Head 3/8 

to a species of ugly, brutish, peevish humanoids who live in isolation 
from humans, often dwell in caves and cavern systems, and can be 
turned to stone if struck by the sun’s rays. Trolls can be up to twice Athletics 51%, Brawn 73%, Deceit 47%, Endurance 64%, Evade 42%, Perception 

the size of a human, and are usually distinguished by their ugly, 51%, Stealth 61%, Unarmed 71%, Willpower 42% 

warty faces, oversized ears, straggling unkempt hair, a mouth full of 
tombstone-like teeth, and a tendency to eat human flesh when they 
can get it. Whilst this is true of most trolls, it is not true for all. Some Obsession with Place/Thing 95%, Loathe Billy Goats 90% 

trolls are far fairer in their appearance — although always large in 
size and stature— and their dispositions are as varied as for humans. ‘ombat Style & Weapons 

Many folk legends surround trolls, such as their ability to regen- Troll Fury (Club, Hammer, Thrown Rock) 61% 

erate the damage of any wound. Such rumours are false but have 
their basis in the fact that the hide of a troll is naturally resistant to Size/Force Reach Damage 

non-magical damage — an easy to make mistake when most battles Club (Ogre size) L M 1d8+1d8 4/10 

against trolls are performed in the dark. Despite this, they can still 
Maul E VL 1d12+3+1d8 4/10 

drown, burn or suffer injuries from wrestling. Likewise the idea that 
trolls can be driven off by loud noises is also false; rather they are Thrown Rock L - 1d6+1d8 - 

driven to rage by excessive noise which hurts their sensitive ears. 
Tists L M 1d4+1d8 As for Arm 

A peculiarity amongst trolls is possession and guardianship. Some 
trolls become absorbed with a particular fixture (such as a bridge), 

269



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

landmark (such as a tree or interestingly shaped outcrop of rocks) 
Unicorn Attributes 

or possessions (club, hammer, stolen wealth), and become obsessive 
STR: 2d6+21 (28) Action Points 3 

about its safety. Trolls caught in the grip of such an obsession always 
act aggressively when they think the subject of it is under threat, no CON: 2d6+6 (13) Damage Modifier ~ +2d6 

matter how slight. Unprovoked attacks are common where a troll SIZ: 2d6+30 (37) Magic Points 19 

believes someone is after whatever it covets. DEX: 2d6+12 (19) Movement 12m 

Direct sunlight can pose problems for trolls. Some are able to INS: 2d6+7 (14) Initiative Bonus 17 

function in daylight, as long as the sky is overcast, whilst others — 
POW: 2d6+12 (19) Armour Hide 

those who with the strongest links with to darkness — are, indeed, 
Abilities Formidable Natural Weapons, 

turned to stone when struck by the sun’s rays. 
Life Sense, Trample 

This different reaction to sunlight differentiates troll species. To 
determine how a troll is affected, roll on the Troll Darkness Bond Magic None 

table (see previous page). 
1d20 Location API/HP 

1-3 Right Hind Leg 1/10 
UNnIicCoORrnN 
A pure-white horse with a long, graceful, spiralling horn emerg- 46 Left Hind Leg 1/10 

ing from the forchead, unicorns represent grace, dignity and purity. 7-9 Hindquarters 1/11 

Killing a unicorn is said to curse the killer, and only those with pure 
10-12 Torequarters 1/12 

hearts, minds and bodies can hope to approach, or tame, a unicorn. 
Those motivated by evil and chaos view unicorns as an enemy, and 13-14 Right Front Leg 1/9 

may try to seek-out the beasts for murder or torture, contributing to 15-16 Left Front Leg 1/9 

the animal’s wariness. However certain circumstances might bring a 
17-20 Head 1/10 

unicorn into the vicinity of others — usually when someone of pure 
motive and heart needs help — or certain spells. 

The unicorn’s horn is magical, possessing the power of healing. 
BAthletics 77%, Brawn 85%, Endurance 66%, Evade 78%, Perception 73%, 

If touched against an injured location, the horn restores a num- 
Stealth 73%, Willpower 78% 

ber of Hit Points equal to half the unicorn’s Magic Points and any 
disease or poison currently suffered is neutralized. Each use of this 

Combat Style & Weapons 
power diminishes the unicorn’s Magic Points by 1 so successive 

Indomitable Sentinel (Horn, Hoofs) 87% 
bouts of healing grow progressively weaker. Severed limbs cannot be 
reattached but crushed or maimed ones are restored. Such healing 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 
is performed at the will of the unicorn, which cannot be compelled 

Gore H L 1d10+2d6 As for Head 
or forced. Any virginal character can attempt to gain a unicorn’s 
help and trust through an Influence roll opposed by the creature’s Trample E T 4d6 As for Leg 

Willpower. If the character can also be considered to be pure of 
mind and spirit (and here the Games Master must decide if this 

VAaMmPpIiRrEe 
is true) then the Influence roll becomes one grade easier. All other 

Kings and queens of the undead, vampires sustain themselves 
characters have no hope of gaining a unicorn’s trust and any char- 

through drinking of blood of sapient creatures. The following type 
acter openly following or tainted by chaos immediately causes the 

of vampire is based upon European myth, but can be tweaked to fit 
unicorn to flee. 

the countless different versions of other cultures and fantasy worlds. 
A pure character who critically succeeds in gaining a unicorn’s 

The manner of becoming a vampire depends on the campaign. 
trust also gains its love. This forms a Passion between the two which 

In some settings vampirism may be the rare result of a curse, posses- 
can be used for securing aid or help in the future. Securing that 

sion or deliberate self transformation. In others vampirism may be a 
unicorn’s help becomes automatic, and gaining the help of other 

contagious disease which affects anyone bitten by one of these mon- 
unicorns becomes one grade casier. 

sters. Many superstitions surround the creation of vampires, and 
If killed a unicorn’s horn retains some of its healing abilities. If 

thus the real cause may remain obfuscated. About the only thing 
ground into a powder (one horn creates 1d6+3 doses), and ingested 

which is definitively known is that vampirism only affects sapient 
it cures any disease or poison. However, killing a unicorn results in 

species. 
a curse for the killer. The exact nature is up the Games Master to 
decide but it can include Luck Points failing to regenerate, no natu- 
ral healing, development of a disease or deformity, and so on. 

The horn is considered a magical weapon with which the uni- 
corn can parry attacks, but it only uses it this way if cornered or 
unable to canter. By preference a unicorn charges, if possible, tram- 
pling its victim on the way through. 

270



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

When raised as a vampire, the creature receives the following 
Vampire Attributes 

benefits: 
STR: 3d6x2 (22) Action Points 3 

& The vampire gains the Undead ability, rendering it immune CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier ~ +1d4 

to the detrimental effects of most injuries and the affects of SIZ: 2d6+6 (13) Magic Points 11 
Fatigue, save for that lost by not feeding (see below). 

DEX: 3d6x2 (22) Movement 6m 
& The vampire is infused by an unholy strength and speed. 

INT: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 18 
Multiply STR and DEX by two. 

& The vampire’s natural weapons are augmented by the growth POW: 3d6 (11) Armour None 

of fangs and iron hard finger nails, if the species did not CHA: 3d6 (11) Abilities Allergy (Sunlight), Darksight, 

already possess something similar. Gaze Attack (Domination), 

& The vampire becomes immune to most non-magical attacks, Immunity (Mundane 

its flesh instantly re-knitting together or invulnerable unless Weapons), Undead, Vampiric, 

specifically decapitated in a single blow — although it can still Vulnerable (Special) 

be destroyed by burning, drowning or exposure to sunlight. Magic Some may retain the magical 

& The vampire gains a gaze attack with the power to dominate skills possessed in life. 

sapient and animal victims. The vampire must spend a Magic 
1d20 Location AP/HP 

Point on his turn and engage the target in an opposed Will- 
power roll. If the victim loses it falls under the control of the 1-3 Right Leg 0/5 

vampire’s will (see below). 46 Left Leg 0/5 

& The vampire might also develop an alternate form (roll on the 
7-9 Abdomen 0/6 

Vampire Shape-Shift table). This form gains the same immu- 
nities as its normal form, but provides it with alternate senses 10-12 Chest 0/7 

and means of locomotion. Shape-Shifting requires a success- 13-15 Right Arm 0/4 

ful Willpower roll to initiate, and takes 1d3 combat rounds to 
16-18 Left Arm 0/4 

complete. It costs at least 1 Magic Point to shape-shift and 1 
point per hour thereafter to maintain the form. 19-20 Head 0/5 

In return, vampires exhibit certain weaknesses, as follows: 

Athletics 74%, Brawn 65%, Deceit 54%, Endurance 62%, Evade 64%, Influence 
& The need to consume blood weekly. For each week it does not 

62%, Perception 54%, Seduction 64%, Stealth 75%, Unarmed 84%, Willpower 
feed, the vampire suffers a level of Fatigue which does not 

62% 
recover until it feeds again; each victim (who must be drained 
to death) reducing its Fatigue level by one. If the vampire 

Passions 
drops to the level of Comatose they enter a state of suspended 

Covet Power 95%, Love to Seduce 90%, Abhor Life 80% 
animation, but do not die. 

& Susceptibility to sunlight, suffering 1d6 damage per round to 
Combat Style & Weapons 

each location it contacts. 
Generally fights using Unarmed 

& Catatonic sleepers, vampires find it difficult to awaken if dis- 
turbed during the hours of daylight. Consequently they try to 

Size/Force Reach Damage 
find remote and easy to secure lairs. 

Bite M T 1d4+1d4 As for Head 
& Vulnerability to impaling weapons of a particular type of 

wood (ash or hawthorne for example). Tists M S 1d3+1d4 As for Arm 

All other superstitions concerning vampires, such as its dislike of 
Perhaps the most frightening power of vampires is their ability 

garlic or lack of reflection, are merely folklore, and need not have 
to dominate victims, turning folk into unwitting servants for the 

any basis in truth, although a fun concept would be a newly raised 
creature. Although this power requires direct eye contact and the 

vampire who believes that they are true. investment of a Magic Point, which the vampire does not recover 
Vampires are fearsome opponents. In combat they are almost until he lets the domination drop, until that time the victim can be 

unstoppable without magical weapons or offensive spells, although 
controlled anywhere within a range of the vampire’s POW in kilo- 

for some reason their neck is vulnerable to decapitation if the blow 
metres. Whilst the victim may remain at the beck and call of its 

does twice the Hit Points of the head in a single strike. 
master, the vampire must actually concentrate to the exclusion of all 

Impaling weapons made of certain types of wood can harm a 
else to actively control one of its servitors. 

vampire, bypassing their natural immunity to mundane weapons. 
Vampires do not normally feed during the midst of combat. 

These however do not actually kill the vampire, but instead prevent 
However, if pressed, they can drain a victim of blood in a matter 

it from instantly regenerating the damage inflicted upon it. A head- 
of moments, sucking one level of Fatigue per Round until inter- 

less spear, arrow or crosshow bolt which both Impales and inflicts 
rupted or the victim is dead. Usually vampires prefer to take their 

a Major Wound, renders that particular location immobile. If this 
time drinking rather than glutting themselves. 

is the head or chest the vampire becomes quiescent. Removing the Japanese and Malaysian myths have similar vampiric forms 
stake allows the creature to rise again. (the rokuro-kubi and penanngglan respectively). These vampiric 

271



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

VAaMmPpIiRrEe SHhAaPpEeSsHhIiFfTt TAaBbLlEe 
Winged Ape Attributes 

1d100 Alternate Form STR: 2d6+12 (19) Action Points 3 

01-75 None. The vampire cannot shape-shift. CON: 2d6+9 (16) Damage Modifier ~ +1d8 

76-80 Wolf (use all physical characteristics for the wolf entry). SIZ: 2d6+15 (22) Magic Points 11 

81.85 Bat (becomes a bat-like monstrosity but retains its original SIZ. It DEX: 2d6+6 (13) Movement 4m (land), 8m (flying) 
gains the Flying ability and Fly skill). 

INS: 2d6+7 (14) Initiative Bonus 14 
. Swarm of Rats (becomes a pack of rats which can scatter in all 

POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Fur 
directions to eventually coalesce at a later time). 

91.95 Gaseous (becomes non-corporeal and can, in its mist-like form, pass Abilities Diving Strike, Flying, 

Formidable Natural Weapons 
through any gap permitting the flow of air). 

96-100 Roll Twice —ignoring this result if rolled again. Magic None 

creatures detach their heads from their bodies, somtimes dragging 1d20 Location AP/HP 

their entrails with them and take to the night skies to hunt fresh 1-3 Right Leg 2/8 

blood. At daybreak they return to their bodies and reform, with 4-6 Left Leg 2/8 
daily life continuing as normal. 

7-9 Abdomen 2/9 
Using these kinds of undead in MYTHRAS means adjusting the 

hit locations slightly: 01-15 strikes the entrails and 16-20 strikes the 10 Chest 2/10 

head. The creatures have the Flying ability and all other relevant 11-12 Right Wing 0/8 
abilities for traditional vampires. 

13-14 Left Wing 0/8 
A rokuro-kubi or penanngglan may not even be aware of what 

happens to them after sunset, living relatively normal lives during 15-16 Right Arm 2/7 

daylight hours. 
17-18 Left Arm 2/7 

19-20 Head 2/8 
WIiNnGgEeDd APpEe 

Winged apes resemble silverback gorillas save for the pair of Skills 
huge, bat-like wings sprouting from the shoulders, giving them flight. Athletics 62%, Brawn 71%, Endurance 62%, Evade 46%, Fly 62%, Perception 
Despite being flying creatures they are primarily ground-dwellers, 55%, Willpower 52% 

using their flight simply to chase prey, move short distances quickly 
and intimidate others. They lack the strength to maintain sustained Combat Style & Weapons 

flight or even take off without a running start; often requiring a high Rip Apart (Fists, Teeth, Wing Strike) 72% 
place from which to launch themselves. 

Winged apes frequent hilly, mountainous and jungle areas, often Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 
finding homes in ancient, overgrown ruins. They are omnivorous 

Bite M T 1d3+1d8 As for Head 
but follow a largely herbivorous 

diet, seeking meat only on TFists M M 1d4+1d8 As for Arm 

. rare  occasions. Wing M L 1d3+1d8 As for Wing 

oy That said, if 
' an intruder is They form groups of between 10 and 30 individuals with a strong 

- f and aggressive male as the pack leader, and supplemented by several 
L] 

strong beta males. The alpha male has the privilege of mating 
" H,_‘H \%“\ with all the females in the pack and other males must wait 

their turn or challenge the alpha male for breeding rights. 

 WWoorlrf 
g Oldest of the canine species and feared 

pack-hunters, wolves are native to temper- 
ate and sub-arctic climates, preferring for- 

ests, hills and moorland. A pack consists of 
between 12 and 30 wolves led by an alpha 

male — usually the strongest of the pack but often 
killed, 

the oldest. The pack hierarchy is incredibly strong; most individ- 
winged apes will happily 

ual wolves are subservient to the alpha male and challengers to the 
feed on the carcass. 

position are set-upon by the others. Any male that beats the leader 
The apes are highly ter- 

generally assumes the alpha position, and may drive out the loser (if 
ritorial and extremely aggres- 

death does not result) or the loser may assume a life of subservience 
sive to those who their territory. 

to the new leader, thereby retaining a place in the community. 

272



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

any dog, use those for the wolf (which is the progenitor of all canine 
Attributes 

breeds), and adjust the physical statistics (STR, SIZ and DEX) 
STR: 1d3+6 (8) Action Points 2 

accordingly. All dogs are pack animals that choose a leader (even if 
CON: 3d6 (11) Damage Modifier ~ -1d2 this is considered to be a human owner) and, if kept in a pack, will 
SIZ: 1d3+6 (8) Magic Points 7 exhibit wolf-like pack tendencies at some stage. 
DEX: 3d6 (11) Movement 8m 

INS: 2d6+6 (13) Initiative Bonus 12 LyYcCaAnNtThHrRoOPpYy 
Lycanthropy is the condition that transforms a human into a 

POW: 2d6 (7) Armour Fur 
wolf form through some appropriate environmental trigger (full 

Abilities Night Sight moon, for example). Any character struck by lycanthropy trans- 

Magic None forms into a wolf of a SIZ similar to the human form, but replacing 
INT with INS. STR, CON, DEX and POW is the higher of the 
human or wolf form, as are the listed skills. Some lycanthropes also 

1d20 Location AP/HP gain immunity to mundane damage, but retain a vulnerability, silver 
1-2 Right Hind Leg 1/4 being their traditional weakness. 

34 Left Hind Leg 1/4 The wolf form lasts for a number of hours equal to the lycan- 
thrope’s CON. The transformation process takes 1d3 minutes and is 

5-7 Hindquarters 1/5 
excruciatingly painful. 

8-10 Forequarters 1/6 

11-13 Right Front Leg 1/4 WYyRrMm// WYyVvEeRrNn 
14-16 Left Front Leg 1/4 Wyrms and wyverns are draconic entities that have serpentine 

bodies, a fierce, dragon-like head and wings. The only difference 
17-20 Head 1/4 

between the two is that wyrms lack any legs, whereas wyverns pos- 
sess a set of hind legs. The wings in both species are too small to 
sustain flight over long distances which mean they normally traverse 

Athletics 59%, Brawn 36%, Endurance 62%, Evade 52%, Perception 60%, Track terrain by either wriggling or hop about with long, leaping bounds. 
64%, Willpower 44% 

Neither creature has the intelligence of a dragon, being mere 
predatory beasts. They lack a breath weapon but make up for this 

Combat Style & Weapons 
with savage ferocity and imposing size. They are found in a diverse 

Pack Savage (Bite) 59% range of terrain, favouring hilly and moorland regions although 
both can be found in forests, jungles or swamps making their lairs 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage 
in deep burrows. Wyrms are capable of hugging the ground and 

Bite S T 1d4-1d2 As for Head 

Wolves are most active at night but can be roused to activity 
during the day. Hunting expeditions are highly co-ordinated affairs. m/Wyvern Attributes 

A pack chooses and stalks its prey carefully and attacks, when they STR: 2d6+18 (25) Action Points 3 

happen, consist of successive waves of between three and six ani- CON: 2d6+12 (19) Damage Modifier ~ +2d6 

mals aiming to incapacitate the prey before tearing out the throat or SIZ: 4d6+30 (44) Magic Points 11 
cutting off air at the windpipe. The alpha male feeds first, followed 

DEX: 2d6+12 (19) Movement 8m (land), 16m (flying) 
by the remainder of the pack in an established order. The youngest 

INS: 2d6+5 (12) Initiative Bonus 16 
members of a pack may have to make do with scraps. 

In combat wolves rely on their powerful bite rather than their POW: 3d6 (11) Armour Scales 

claws. Once a bite takes hold the wolf locks its jaws, and continues Abilities Cold Blooded, Dark Sight, 

to exert pressure through the canines and by vigorously shaking the Flying, Frenzy 

head, deepening and lengthening the bites. Wolves therefore tend Magic None 

to choose the Grip and Choose Location Special Effects (always 
aiming for an exposed area). A Gripped victim sustains biting dam- Wyrm Wyvern Location AP/HP 

age throughout the duration of the grip as the wolf worries at the 1-4 1-3 Tail 6/12 
wound. 

- 4-5 Right Hind Leg 6/13 
If the alpha male is forced to flee then the pack follows suit, 

although braver individuals may attempt to gain status by remaining - 6-7 Left Hind Leg 6/13 

to fight. 5-8 8-10 Hindquarters 6/14 
Dire wolves are much larger specimens; double STR and SIZ. 

9-12 11-14 Forequarters 6/15 
Canines have been domesticated for as long as man has lived in 

settlements. Being relatively easy to train, tame and breed, it has led 13-15 15-16 Right Wing 6/13 

to a vast range of types, sizes and shapes. As well as being treated as 16-18 17-18 Left Wing 6/13 
pets or house-dogs, most dogs have been put to work in some capac- 

19-20 19-20 Head 6/14 
ity: hunting, guarding, herding and so on. If you need statistics for 

273



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

is converted to INS. In addition it usually carries the disease 
Skills 

which caused its own transformation. To make this type scar- 
Athletics 64%, Brawn 89%, Endurance 78%, Evade 68%, Fly 74%, Perception 

ier, treat Zombie Plague as a mundanely incurable disease 
63%, Willpower 62% 

with a Potency of 80%. Anyone bitten by the zombie must 
make an opposed roll of their Endurance versus the potency. 

Combat Style & Weapons 
Tailure to beat the plague means that they begin to rot before 

Draconic Terror (Bite, Tail Sweep) 84% 
they die; losing characteristic points at a rate of one per hour. 

Weapon Size/Force Reach Damage After 1d6 hours they expire from the disease and minutes 
later arise as a zombie. 

Bite E L 1d12+2d6 As for Head 

Tail E VL 1d10+2d6 As for Tail The following statistics are for an average human zombie created 
by zombie plague, arising from death two hours after infection. 

slithering, snake-like, to stalk prey. Wyverns are less discreet, relying Average zombies are often little threat unless they mob oppo- 

on frontal assaults. nents using superior numbers, are equipped with armour and weap- 

In the following table, Hit Location ranges have been included ons, or carry zombie plague. 

for both creatures. Zombies created through magic need no sustenance. Those 

An aquatic form of the wyvern exists, replacing the hindquarters created by plague or contagion may need to consume blood, flesh, 

and tail with the fins and tail of an enormous fish. The sea-wyvern hearts or brains to remain functional. These zombies are driven by 

gains the Aquatic ability and Swim at 74%. hunger and may possess the Life Sense ability to help them hunt. 

Zombie Attributes 
ZOoMmBbIiEe STR: 3d6-2 (9) Action Points 2 

Any recently deceased corpse animated through magic or some 
CON: 3d6-2 (9) Damage Modifier ~ -1d2 

exotic plague is a zombie. Mindless, decaying and driven by a desire 
to consume flesh and blood, zombies have no intellect to speak of. SIZ: 2d6+6-2 (11) Magic Points 0 

Magically created zombies are often under the control of a caster in DEX: 3d6-2 (9) Movement 6m 

a similar way to Skeletons (see pages 264-265). INS: 2d6+6-2 (11) Initiative Bonus 10 

The freshness of the original corpse at the time of its animation POW: 3d6-2 (9) Armour None 
defines much of a zombie’s toughness. Their characteristics start 

CHA: 3d6-2 (9) Abilities Undead 
as equivalent to the creature in life, but (assuming no burial) are 
reduced by one point for each day which passes after death before Magic Some may retain the magical 

it is raised. Once animated a zombie does not normally rot any fur- skills possessed in life. 

ther, but retains its foul stench. 
1d20 Location API/HP 

Of course the rate of the initial degeneration depends on the 
1-3 Right Leg 0/4 

environment. In cold or subterrancan climates the rate may slow 
down to one point per week; whilst places like bogs or glaciers may 4-6 Left Leg 0/4 

preserve corpses indefinitely. However quickly it deteriorates, once 79 Abdomen 0/5 
a corpse has lost half of its STR or CON what remnants of flesh 

10-12 Chest 0/6 
remain will simply slough oft the underlying bones. From this point 
the body can only be raised as a skeleton. 13-15 Right Arm 0/3 

Zombies are relentless in whatever task assigned to them and 16-18 Left Arm 0/3 
pursue it tirelessly. As per the Undead trait they are not subject to 

19-20 Head 0/4 
fatigue. Neither are they unduly affected by damage, and the only 
thing that will stop a zombie from moving is to destroy either the 
head or chest (whichever of the two the animating magic or disease 

Athletics 38%, Brawn 40%, Endurance 58%, Evade 38%, Perception 40%, 
is primarily located) by reducing it to a Major Wound. Thus fresh 

Unarmed 58%, Willpower 48% 
corpses can be quite difficult to put down, whereas badly rotted ones 
are rather vulnerable. 

To create a zombie take a creature, decide the nature of its unlife, 
Passions 

and zombify it. 
Brains... 99% 

& Magically raised zombies take on the mental characteristics 
Combat Style & Weapons 

and physical skills of the caster or spirit controlling the body. 
Note that some methods of animating zombies can grant Generally fights using Unarmed 

the corpse bonuses to their deteriorated characteristics. In 
Size/Force Reach Damage 

addition they can wear armour and wield any weapons they 
would naturally have in their previous life. Bite S T 1+Discase As for Head 

& A zombie created by some virulent plague is an autonomous TFists S S 1d3-1d2 As for Arm 
creature, retaining the physical skills and degenerated men- 
tal characteristics of the original being, but any INT value 

274



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

CHhAaOoSs FEeaATtuURrEeSs 
Certain creatures are tainted by Chaos, which warps and alters 

natural forms in subtle and not-so-subtle ways. Creatures so tainted 
may have one or more Chaos Features, chosen to fit the recipient or 
rolled randomly: 

CHhAaOoSs FEeaATtuURrEeSs 

1d100 Feature Effect 

Possesses a flesh dissolving acidic ichor which sprays whenever the skin is damaged, causing damage to the attacker; roll 1d4 to determine the 
01-02 Acidic 

strength of the acid, 1=1d2, 2=1d4, 3=1d6 and 4=1d8 damage per wound. 

Produces pheromones which attract and seduce victims. The creature gains the Seduction skill at POW x5%. It can be resisted using 
03-04 Alluring 

Willpower as per any Seduction. 

One half of the creature is larger, longer or taller than the other, double the Hit Points for locations in the larger side and halve the Hit Points 
05-06 Asymmetric 

of locations for the smaller. 

The creature possesses resilient, malleable cartilage rather than bone. It can squeeze through any size of gap and takes no damage from any 
07-08 Boneless 

fall. 

Sensory organs are distributed over the entire body and sentience is located elsewhere — but not in the head. The brain is found in a random 
09-10 Brainless 

location. 

11-12 Burning The creature seethes with chaotic heat, injuring anyone within Short range; roll a d4, 1=1d2, 2=1d4, 3=1d6 and 4=1d8 damage per round. 

13-14 Chameleon Naturally blends with its surroundings and has an effective Stealth skill of 100%+POW. 

15-16 Climbing Gains the Adhering Ability. 

Inflicts a virulent disease with a delay of 1d8 hours and potency of CONx5%, which reduces a random characteristic byld8 points: roll a d6, 
17-18 Contagious 

1=STR, 2=CON, 3=DEX, 4=INT, 5=POW or 6=CHA. 

19-20 Corroding Weapons sustain 1d8 damage each time they strike the creature. Weapon Armour Points offer no protection. 

All magical effects within the creature’s POW in metres are suppressed by 1d8 Magnitude. Spells reduced to zero Magnitude are dispelled 
Dampener 

unless part of a permanent enchantment. 

Drains the vitality of nearby plants and creatures. Those in Short range of the creature must succeed in an unopposed Endurance roll each 
Deathly 

round to avoid suffering 1 point of damage to every Hit Location, ignoring armour. 

Creature is covered with unsettling forms, such as miniature arms, multiple eyes or mouths, writhing pseudopods, etc. Viewers must succeed in 
Disturbing 

an unopposed Willpower test or be helpless with horror until they can make the roll successfully. 

27-28 Domineering Manipulates those around it with mental commands, which cannot be resisted unless the target is successful in an unopposed Willpower test. 

29-30 Draining Temporarily weakens the magical power of an opponent, draining 1d8 MP with each successful strike. 

Produces a buzzing noise that sedates listeners. All within the creature’s POW x5 in metres must succeed in an unopposed Willpower roll to 
31-32 Droning 

avoid falling asleep for 1d8 minutes. 

Restricts the movements of those within melee range, who must succeed in an unopposed Brawn roll to avoid being rendered physically 
33-34 Entangle 

helpless each round. 

35-36 Trightening Creature appears terrifyingly dangerous; viewers must succeed in an unopposed Willpower roll or flee the creature immediately. 

37-38 Tey Radiates freezing waves of cold, injuring anyone within melee range; roll 1d4, 1=1d2, 2=1d4, 3=1d6 and 4=1d8 damage per round. 

39-40 Intangible Moves through solid objects as though non-corporeal. Whilst intangible it cannot be harmed, but neither can it attack. 

41-42 Leaper Has powerfully sprung limbs, multiplying its jump range by a factor of 1d4+1. 

43-44 Levitating Hovers above the ground giving it the ability to move over any surface without sinking or leaving tracks. 

Assumes the shape of a creature it successfully touches, maintaining its own Characteristics, but mimicking the locations and appearance of 
45-46 Mimic 

the being contacted. 

47-48 Mournful Appearance is sad or pathetic. Observers must succeed in an unopposed Willpower roll to be able to begin attacking it. 

Roll a random location and remove it from the creature. It no longer has this location, but it still functions perfectly well without it, even 
49-50 Mutated 

defying logic. 

51-52 Nerveless Does not feel any pain and ignores the effects of Serious Wounds. 

53-54 Neutralising Any spells cast at the creature are immediately neutralized. 

Produces a cloud of mist, spores or darkness that blinds observers. Those affected must succeed in an unopposed Perception roll every turn to 
55-56 Obfuscating 

see the creature. 

57-58 Oversized One location is swollen doubling its Hit Points. 

59-60 Paralysing Renders victims incapable of movement; those touched must succeed in an unopposed Endurance roll to avoid 1d8 minutes of paralysis. 

Possesses an odd primary sense; roll a d6, 1=Echolocation (sonar), 2=Thermoception (heat), 3=Cerebralception (sapient consciousness), 

61-62 Perceptive 4=Nociception (pain), 5=Ethoception (souls), 6=Thaumaception (magic). The creature does not rely on sight to perceive others and may lack 

eyes. 

275



MyYyTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

CHhAaOoSs FEeaATtuURrEeSs 

1d100 Feature Effect 

. One unarmed attack inflicts a venomous poison with a delay of 1d8 rounds and a potency of CONx5%, which inflicts a Poison Condition 
63-64 Poisonous 

selected from page 75. 

65-66 Pol h Changes shape every round, maintaining its Characteristics, but assuming the locations of the new form and carrying over any damage 
- m 

Ol already suffered (Games Masters should prepare various forms in advance). 

67-68 Project Any damage inflicted on the creature is felt by anyone within POW metres, who suffer the psychological, but not physical effects as if they 
- rojector 

) had been wounded too. 

69-70 Quick Movement rate is multiplied by a factor of 1d4+1. 

71-72 Reflecting All magic cast on the creature is reflected back against the caster. 

73-74 Regenerating Recovers 1 Hit Point per round to every location, unless the creature has suffered a Major Wound in the injured location. 

75.76 Roari Produces a thunderous roar, deafening listeners, who must succeed in an unopposed Endurance roll to avoid becoming temporally stunned 

) i for 1d3 Turns. 

77-78 Scintillating Possesses a shifting chromatic aura that confuses onlookers. All attacks against the creature are one grade harder. 

The creature absorbs the ambient light in its immediate surroundings, creating a pool of total darkness with a radius equal to POW in 
79-80 Shadowy 

metres. 

8189 Shocki Charges itself with electricity, inflicting a shock on those that hit it (if using metal or uninsulated weapons, or are struck by it; roll 1d4, 
- ocking 

3 1=1d2, 2=1d4, 3=1d6 and 4=1d8 damage per blow). 

83-84 Silent Completely inaudible — even its attacks. 

85-86 Slimy Cannot be grappled or gripped in close combat. The creature leaves a sticky mucus trail wherever it travels. 

87-88 Stench Releases nauseating odours that sicken inhalers, who must succeed in an unopposed Endurance roll to avoid uncontrollable vomiting for 1d3 
- 1 

ene Combat Rounds. 

89-90 Sticky Secretes a strong glue or mucus which causes items to stick to its skin, requiring a successful unopposed Brawn roll and a Combat Action to 
- ic 

free. 

91-92 Teleporter Can freely teleport to a new location once per round. The location must be within a number of metres equal to POW x2. 

Changes the substance of organic material it touches into another substance; living victims must succeed in an unopposed Endurance roll to 
93-94 Transmuter . . . . . 

avoid the struck location being changed into crystal, dust, stone, wine, bronze and so on. 

95-96 Vampiric Hit Point damage inflicted on an opponent is transferred to itself, healing any wounds currently suffered. 

97-98 Warded Invulnerable to one specific type of material; steel, wood, stone, flesh, etc. 

99-100 Weakening Temporarily reduces the STR of an opponent by 1d8 each successful (undefended) hit. 

NoNn-HumAaNn HiiTt 

LoOCcAaTtIioONnSs 
The tables in this section are for Games Masters who enjoy creat- 

ing their own creatures - or when a character might, through magic, 
be transmogrified into something else. 

Arachnid Centaurid 
1d20 Location 1d20 Location Location Location 

1-2 Right Rear Leg 1-3 Right Leg 1-2 Tail 1 Right Rear Leg 

3-4 Left Rear Leg 4-6 Left Leg 3-4 Right Hind Leg 2 Left Rear Leg 

5-6 Mid Right Leg 7-8 Hindquarters 5-6 Left Hind Leg 3 Right Middle Leg 

7-8 Mid Left Leg 9-10 Forequarters 7-8 Hindquarters 4 Left Middle Leg 

9-10 Tore Right Leg 11-12 Right Front Leg 9-10 Right Wing 5-9 Abdomen 

11-12 Tore Left Leg 13-14 Left Front Leg 11-12 Left Wing 10-13  Thorax 

BRI domen 15-16 Chest 13-14 Forequarters 14 Right Front Leg 

. 17 Right Arm 15-16 Right Front Leg 15 Left Front Leg 

15-16  Front Right Leg - Lol o 1718 Left Front Leg 1620  Head 
17-18 Tront Left Leg 19-20 Head 19-20 Head 

19-20 Cephalothorax 

276



MyyYTtHhRrAaSs::  CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs 

Dorsal Finned Aquatic Pachyderm Serpentine Tailed Arachnid 

1d20 Location 1d20 Location 1d20 Location 1d20 Location 

1-3 Tail 1-2 Right Hind Leg 13 Tail Tip 1-2 Tail 

4-6 Dorsal Fin 3-4 Left Hind Leg 4-5 Mid End-length 3 Right Rear Leg 

7-10 Hindquarters 5-8 Hindquarters 6-7 Fore End-length 4 Left Rear Leg 

11-14 Torequarters 9-12 Forequarters 8-9 Rear Mid-length 5 Mid Right Leg 

15-16 Right Fin 13-14  Right Front Leg 10-12 Mid Mid-length 6 Mid Left Leg 

17-18 Left Fin 15-16  Left Front Leg 13-14 Fore Mid-length 7 Tore Right Leg 

19-20 Head 17 Trunk 15-16 Rear Fore-length 
8 Tore Left Leg 

18-20  Head 17-18 Mid Fore-length 
9-12 Thorax 

Tailed Biped 19-20  Head 
13-15  Right Pincer 

1d20 Location 
Tailed Quadruped, 

1-3 Tail 16-18 Left Pincer 
1d20 Location Winged Biped 

4-5 Right Leg 
1-3 Tail 19-20 Cephalothorax 

1d20 Location 
6-7 Left Leg 4-5 Right Hind Leg 1-3 Right Leg 
8-10 Abdomen 6-7 Left Hind Leg 4-6 Left Leg 

Winged Insect 
11-14 Chest 8-10 Hindquarters 7-9 Abdomen 
15-16  Right Arm 1d20 Location 

11-14  Torequarters 10 Chest 
1 Right Rear Leg 

17-18 Left Arm 15-16  Right Front Leg 11-12 Right Wing 
2 Left Rear Leg 

17-18 Left Front Leg 
19-20  Head 13-14 Left Wing 

19-20  Head 3-4 Metathorax 
15-16 Right Arm 

5 Mid Right Leg 

17-18 Left Arm 6 Mid Left Leg 
Winged Quadruped 

7-10 Prothorax 
1d20 Location 19-20 Head 

1-2 Right Hind Leg 11-12 Right Wing 

3-4 Left Hind Leg 13-14 Left Wing 
5-7 Hindquarters 

15-16 Right Forelimb 
8-10 Forequarters 

11-12 Right Wing 17-18 Left Forelimb 

13-14  Left Wing 
19-20 Head 

15-16  Right Front Leg 

17-18  Left Front Leg 

19-20  Head 



Mythras:  Games Mastery

oy X 2 o % o F WKW I+ & SO << A o B B T = < <G| 

Games 

Mastery
oy X 2 o % o F WKW MK K EX M T XN 

his chapter provides a range of notes for Games Masters — Adapt, change, improvise, import. These are all useful and valid 
I both those new to MYTHRAS and old hands. It offers tips and techniques for making your MYTHRAS. 

T techniques for running enjoyable games along with certain 
optional rules that Games Masters may wish to include in their cam- 
paigns. It is by no means exhaustive: Games Masters are continu- 
ally developing new ideas and techniques and many of these will be THhEe PEeTtEeRrSseEnN RUuLlEeSs 
unique to your own style of play. 

oOofF GooDd GAaMmIinNGg 
Sandy Petersen, celebrated game designer, has created five easy 

rules that are worthwhile for all Games Masters to bear in mind 

THh1is i1s YoOUuRr GAaMmEe when running a gaming session. 

The MYTHRAS rules are comprehensive and reasonably detailed. 1. Make Bonuses Worthwhile. If something is worth doing, it’s 

They work together through certain underlying concepts that are worth doing on a grand scale. Bonuses (and penalties) to 

replicated throughout the different areas of game mechanics: char- skills, whether offered through magic or in some other form, 

acter creation, combat, magic and so on. However there will always should mean something. This is why modifiers to skills (see 

be occasions where... the Skills chapter) are structured in the way they are. Mod- 
ifiers range from influencing a skill’s chance by increasing 

& A particular rule does not fit a certain, unique situation or it by half again (Easy skills) or reducing by a third, through 
even an overall playing style to being guaranteed success or making something simply 

& Games Masters and players devise something that works bet- impossible to accomplish. Higher magic, too, offers some 
ter for them quite substantial ways to influence skills and characteristics, 

& Rules found in a similar game system using similar mechanics whereas Folk Magic, simplest of all the magical systems, 
are desired over those found in MYTHRAS tends not to offer skill boosts or modifiers. 

Games Masters are encouraged to change, ignore and adopt 2. The Right lo Have Fun. MYTHRAS adventures should be fun 

rules to fit the style and needs of the campaign and players. MyTH- from the minute the players gather at the table. Try not 

RAS has always been extremely flexible in this regard, and this edi- to spend too long in dull preamble or book-keeping and 

tion of the game is no different. If something does not work how you start the session with a bang. Take cues from movies and 

think it should, change it. If you don’t like a particular rule, and feel television shows: good ones involve the characters (and the 

it’s superfluous, drop it. If you find a rule in a sister d100 game that viewer) immediately. Everyone should be involved and feel 

you really like, add it to your MYTHRAS game. The chances are that that they are involved. If things appear to be flagging, spice 

you will not break anything found in MYTHRAS — or can easily adapt them up quickly using humour, excitement, tension or some 

imported or house-created rules to work with the core mechanics. other device that hooks everyone back into the game. It is 

You should make MYTHRAS your game. The rules are a pre-pre- worthwhile having a few such hooks pre-prepared for just 

pared guideline but nothing should be considered as written in such an occasion. You might not need to use them, but if 

stone. There is no right or wrong way to play any roleplaying game, you do, you’ll be glad you made the effort. 

and you should adapt what you find in these pages to make your own 3. Show, Don’t Tell. Actions speak louder than words. If a non- 

game sing the song you want sung. player character is clearly a villain, have him act villainously. 
If a character is good, clean and wholesome, have them act 

278



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

that way. If a situation is foreboding and sinister, pepper a good idea for the Games Master to take a personal copy of ecach 
your description with signs (insects suddenly stop buzzing. A player’s sheet and hold it for both reference, and back-up. Every 
wolf howls. Thunder rumbles. The air grows suddenly cold. good Games Master knows the capabilities of his characters, and 
The characters break out in goose-bumps). You needn’t can use these to develop stories and scenarios that fit with what each 
worry about the players agreeing with your value percep- character can do, and their backstory. 
tions, even you feel they are based in reality: the main idea A supply of counters - coins, sweets, beads, buttons, bottle-tops, or 
is to convey an impression, an atmosphere, and a demon- poker chips — are a useful way of keeping track of variable attributes 
stration of what the characters experience. It all supports such as Action Points, Magic Points and Luck Points. Give each 
the Right to Have Fun. player a supply of different colours or types of counter according 

4. Three Strikes and You’re Out. If a player is making a decision to their character’s statistics and, when a point is spent on some- 
that could make life very difficult for himself and others, thing (performing a Combat Action, casting a spell) have the player 
try to give him at least three chances to make an informed put the appropriate counter into a discard pile. In this way players 
decision and possibly escape his fate. Luck Points will help can easily see what resources they have available, and do not need 
here, but there other techniques too. For example, a dragon to constantly amend their character sheet. The Games Master will 
might be threatening a small settlement; the first signal is need a supply too, for tracking the actions of foes and monsters. 
the villagers warning of the dragon’s lair. If this doesn’t Combat Reference Sheets and Tracker — we strongly recommend print- 
deter the characters, perhaps the dragon can be seen in the ing a copy of the Special Effects for each player at the table. To 
distance circling the mountain tops, casually incinerating begin with they will need to reference the different Special Effects 
the local undergrowth. If that still doesn’t deter the charac- so they can understand what each does and how it works. This will 
ters, then a direct encounter with the dragon — which is the encourage variety of Special Effect use, and saves wear and tear on 
third and final chance — might be looming. However things rulebooks. In time, as the players become more familiar with how 
turn out, the character has had ample opportunity to do Special Effects work, the sheets will be used less often, but making 
something about the situation. If things end badly, at least them available from the start, as part of a Character Pack, is a real 
the opportunities to avert disaster were presented. help for getting to grips with the game. You will also find a Combat 

5. 1t Always the Player’s Fault. By this we mean that, if things do Tracker sheet, used for recording Initiative order, wounds, and so 
go badly for a player, it should be a result of decisions made forth in the Reference section of MYTHRAS (or download from our 
and actions taken, rather than being a fault in the game website). This is designed to help with book-keeping during combat 
rules or their presentation by the Games Master. Players and is recommended for all Games Masters. 
ought not to feel cheated by the game system or bad dice Minatures, and Figures — Whilst MYTHRAS is not necessarily 
rolls. Players must feel that, if they had acted differently, designed specifically for miniatures play, there is no doubt that hav- 
they would have fared better and perhaps emerged victori- ing some form of character representation for combats and battles 
ous. Successful MYTHRAS sessions should not be Players ver- can help understand positioning, movement and engagement. There 
sus the Game System, or Players versus the Games Master. are hundreds of thousands of figures available, from those designed 
Responsibility for actions must be taken by the players, and for roleplaying games (typically 25-28mm) to those designed for war- 
so part of the Games Master’s job is to foster such oppor- games (15-25mm). You can even find very cheap cardboard figures 
tunities using the game system to assist and inform, rather that you can print, cut out, and then use ad infinitum. Choose fig- 
than oppose and penalise. ures that approximate the look and feel of the setting, but otherwise 

you are spoilt for choice. 
Battlemats and Movement Grids — used with figures, battlemats are 

usually pre-printed with either squares or hexagons, and used to reg- 

PRrEePpaARrAaTtIioOnN aAnNDd ulate positioning and movement. The scale represented depends on 
the size of the figures used. Typically, with 25-28mm figures a square 

GAaMmEe AIiDdSs or hex will represent about one metre, but you can, of course, adjust 

There are certain materials and game aids that you may find the scale to fit the figures. Some battlemats are covered in wipe-clean 

help manage each MYTHRAS session. They are not essential but finishes that let you use dry erase markers to sketch out rooms, walls, 

experience has found that they can make life easier. obstacles, and so on: a useful ad hoc mapping tool. 

Scrap Paper — for making notes and especially during character Wipeboard and Dry Erase Markers — a small wipeboard, about the 

creation. lor the latter, have players create their characters in rough dimensions of this book, can be easily bought from stationers along 

first, and when happy, transfer the information to a character sheet. with dry erase markers. These tools are incredibly useful for record- 

Pre-printed Character Sheets — you will find a sample MYTHRAS ing combat details, Initiative order, notes on wounds, or to do a 

character sheet on pages 302 to 303. You are free to copy this for quick, temporary sketch-map rather than rely on reams of scrap 

personal use (or download a copy from www.thedesignmechanism. paper. We recommend investing in a wipeboard and pens: its useful- 

com). It holds all the essential information needed by each player, ness at the gaming table is unparalleled. Plus, some wipeboards are 

and is structured to show the most useful play elements on the front magnetic too, and you can easily buy magnetic counters and sheets 

page, with additional detail on the rear. In time players will find that can then be customized to make Action Point trackers, initia- 

they outgrow their character sheets — or they become untidy, torn, tive trackers and so on, that attach easily to the wipeboard, further 

spoiled, and so on. From time to time refresh the character sheets extending its usefulness. 

but keep the old ones for reference in case they are needed. It is also 

279



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

Games Master Screen — not an essential, but definitely useful. scenarios. When getting together to create characters as a group, 
Screens should, on the Games Master’s side, have all the most rele- look to answer several questions: 
vant tables and rules summaries used during play. The players’ side 

& How do we all know each other? 
can carry artwork or reference materials such as Special Effects so 

& How do we feel about each other? 
that all the players can easily see them. A simple screen can be made 

& Does my character have a special relationship with any of the 
with a few sheets — 3 to 4 — of Letter or A4 card taped together. 

others (a brother, say)? If so, how? 
More expensive vinyl screens, with clear pockets for inserts, can be 

« Why do we want, or need, to work together? 
bought commercially, and these allow for infinite customisation of 

& Who else do we know? 
both Games Master and player information, simply by changing 

& How do we serve our communities? What do our communi- 
the insert. The reference sheets found in the Reference section of 

ties think of us? 
MyTHRAS are designed to work with such screens, or can be copied 

& Where do we want to go and what do we want to do? 
and glued onto a home-made cardboard screen. 

Books, References and Electronic Awds — only the Games Master really It is not necessary to address all of these questions immediately: 
needs the rulebook but a couple of additional copies are always use- answers often develop through time and play. But finding some 
ful in case players want to look something up. As an alternative, a answers at the character creation stage helps establish the group as 
PDF version of MYTHRAS can be easily chopped into appropriate a team and immediately starts to make things seem real. If all the 
pages or chunks (just print out what you need) that can then be used characters have some form of common background element, be it 
in place of the rulebooks, and obviously save on wear and tear. If culture, career, family, clan, cult or something else, they have a genu- 
you have PDF editing software you can compile your own Players’ ine reason for adventuring, and the Games Master does not need to 
Book if needs be. And, of course, PDF displays very well on tablet rely on clichés such as meeting in a crowded drinking establishment. 
devices that are becoming increasingly popular at the games table. 

WHhAaTt SKkiiLlLls ARrEe NEeEeDdEeDd? 
MyTHRAS’s skill system 1s incredibly flexible, allowing you to play 

CRrEeAaTtIinNgG CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs just about any character concept you can conceive. Every skill has a 

Character creation is best as a collaborative exercise — between use in the game. Sometimes though, it is useful to know which skills 

the player and Games Master, but also amongst the players, which are most likely to have a direct impact on play or be required in 

not only saves time but also offers other benefits. certain tense situations. This can help when assigning skill points at 

Group character creation greatly helps in cementing the group either cultural, career or free skill assignment stages. 

together, giving each character a reason for adventuring with the Athletics: Used in a variety of combat opposed rolls (resisting a 

others. Players can discuss and agree on differing and complemen- Bash, for example) 

tary character careers and backgrounds and, during the Culture Brawn: Good Brawn helps in removing impaled weapons — either 

and Community part of character creation, establish relationships one you have impaled, or one that’s been impaled in you. 

between their characters that go merely beyond ‘You all meet in a Combat Style: The higher your combat style, the better you fight. 

tavern...’: For example: Remember that a combat style covers several weapons, and has cer- 
tain traits that come into play in certain circumstances. As well as 

& All the characters could come from the same cultural back- being used to hit and defend against opponents, combat style is also 
ground, which makes logical sense. used in opposed rolls for damage and certain Special Effects. It can 

& Characters can be family members, either close or extended, also be used non-lethally. Why not use your Combat Style as a roll 
which creates bonds of blood and helps define beginning Pas- to intimidate opponents or as a way of identifying yourself to peers 
sions, loyalties and family structures. and contemporaries? 

& Characters can belong to the same, or affiliated, cults or Endurance: A decent Endurance score helps in resisting the effects 
brotherhoods, again providing a reason for adventuring. of Major and Serious Wounds. It is also used to resist certain tar- 

Tying the characters together during the character generation geted spells. 

stage lends the group communal Luck Points, as discussed on page FEvade: Essential for diving out of the way of missile weapons, 

81, representing their bonds and ties. charging monsters and certain targeted spells. It is also used for 

A group exercise can be invaluable in establishing a backstory actively closing range or disengaging from a melee: it is a very useful 

for the characters that the Games Master can then use in future skill. 
Insight: Used for determining motivation, emotional state, plans 

and plots... Insight is an extremely useful skill for reading other peo- 
ple. In combat, use Insight to perhaps determine what an observed 
opponent is likely to do if he generates a Special Effect, or if a seem- 
ingly idle opponent is preparing a spell. 

Passwons: In combat, passions can be used to augment a combat 
style or other skill. If fighting for the clan’s honour, Loyalty to Clan is 
a highly relevant augmentation to a Combat Style. The same is true 
for non-combat situations. Things a character feels strongly about 
constantly influence how certain other skills are used: Influence or 

280



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

Deceit, for example. Know your Passions and consider how they can Masai warriors do not encumber themselves with heavy 
be used in different situations. armour. Similarly, Greek hoplites, despite having very good 

Wallpower: Extremely useful for resisting certain spells, but also for access to bronze, left their limbs free or lightly armoured, to 
resisting Influence and Deceit attempts. Willpower is always a good maximize manoeuvrability, and optimise weight. In some 
skill to develop. cultures, armour may even be viewed as a weakness. 

Do not make the mistake of thinking that the above skills are the 3. Consider Game Impacts: heavy armour slows down the 
only ones that should be concentrated on for development: far from wearer in combat. Even though a character might be able 
it. MyTHRAS allows characters to develop both broad ranges of use- to afford a suit of full, articulated plate, it is cumbersome 
ful skills, and specialized skills for use in specific situations that reflect to wear, hot, and restricts as much as it protects. The edge 
professional training and personal growth. in combat is often won through speed rather than brute 

When it comes to investing skill points in skills during charac- protection. And, traditionally, plate armour is reserved for 
ter creation, and in choosing skills to benefit from Experience rolls, wars; not for daily use. Anyone wandering around a city 
think about your character’s concept and career. Focusing on only dressed as though for a battle will be incongruous and 
a handful of potentially useful skills will penalize the character in attract the wrong kinds of attention. Similarly, large, two- 
other areas that may not be immediately evident. handed weapons certainly deal a great amount of damage, 

In MyTHRAS, characters are not necessarily intended to be arche- but they limit certain options for defence. And, again, walk- 
types, but fully rounded individuals that have a wider range of tal- ing through town with a great axe is a sure way to attract 
ents than merely fighting, sneaking or casting spells. Social skills are trouble. In Rome, all personal weapons were banned in 
as every bit as useful as combat ones — especially if you need to talk the city: thus fantasy realms can, and should, have similar 
your way out of trouble. restrictions and taboos. 

Developing a decent range of skills across a wide spectrum of 4. Consider What’s Reasonable: MYTHRAS does not go over- 
areas improves your chances of succeeding in a multitude of situ- board on detailed rules for encumbrance but this does not 
ations. Within careers especially you have many options for devel- mean that common sense should be ignored. It is simply 
oping a character that is unique, and goes against traditional arche- impractical for a character to carry a kite shield, great axe, 
types and tropes. How about a warrior-poet? A duplicitous clan warhammer, longsword, crossbow, kit-pack and armour. 
adviser? A scrupulous, honest diplomat fighting against the corrupt Guide the players in these limits, and advise them what is 
system? Even a lowly fisherman or farmer can, in time of need, logical and practical. There is no need for extremely detailed 
become a hero of his people. rules regarding what can and cannot be carried — merely a 

MyTHRAS characters are what you make of them, and the rules degree of common sense and practical consideration. 
provide you with the tools to create some truly memorable and 
unique characters that defy conventional moulds and stereotypes 
(although you can build such characters if you want to). SocciiAaLl CLlAaSsSs 

Although the default position is to roll randomly for social class, 

EqQUuIipPmMEenNTt this should not be considered as being the sole method. There are 
several reasons for choosing or assigning social class instead: 

The Economics and Equipment chapter offers a reasonable 
selection of items for characters to buy when beginning the game. & Group integration is easier if all characters are from the same 
However there are a number of caveats for Games Masters when class. 
players start to make equipment selections— and these apply also to & Financial disparities between characters are avoided. 
defining Combat Styles too. 

1. Consider the milieu: what is the general nature of the period This second point is worth some expansion. It is true that those 

in which the campaign will be set? If in something roughly born into a wealthy or privileged background have access to more 

analogous to the classical period (Ancient Greece, Rome, and better equipment, supporting resources and ready cash: but 

Mesopotamia, and so on) equipment, armour and weapon such has it always been. That said, the income levels described in 

choices should reflect that milieu. Just because MYTHRAS the Economics and Equipment chapter relate to the costs of main- 

lists a piece of equipment does not mean it should be avail- taining an accustomed standard of living. Those born into a wealthy 

able. Use your judgement and the milicu of the setting to class will need to spend a far greater proportion of anything they 

guide reasonable choices. earn to maintain that standard of living than, say, Freemen. And, 

2. Consider the cultural background: would barbarians really having monetary wealth available does not always guarantee that 

have access to crossbows and heavy plate armour? Would a its owner has any natural right to it. Wealthier social classes are not 

nomad, used to riding and fighting from horseback, encum- always debt-free — a bag of coins a nobleman has to hand may have 

ber himself or his mount with a polearm? Would a city- been obtained from a moneylender with property used as collateral. 

dweller be trained in using a sling when the militia uses What would happen if the debt was suddenly called in? 

spears and bows? Weapon, armour and equipment choices There is, though, always a certain perception of inequality asso- 

should reflect cultural heritage as much as the milieu. ciated with disparate levels of character wealth. For this reason, 

Consider the environment too. Metal armour is generally and especially if starting wealth is seen as necessary to a campaign, 

impractical in very hot and humid climates and is also Games Masters should assign the same social class to all charac- 

difficult to manufacture, or expensive to obtain, if a soci- ters to maintain parity or limit wealthier classes from beginning 

ety lacks the raw materials needed. There is a reason why the game with what might be perceived as an unfair advantage. In 

281



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

reality, society has always suffered such inequalities, and it should moment, be fruitless and quickly divert their attention with a press- 
be remembered that simply being able to afford lots of equipment, ing scenario elsewhere. 
arms and armour does not equate with being able to use any of it Of course the availability of personal Luck Points makes the risk 
effectively. of failing crucial investigation rolls less likely, providing the Games 

On the other hand, one advantage of having someone move in Master encourages the use of them in non-combat situations. 
advantageous social circles is access and influence in high places. A way around this is through the use of those Luck Points pro- 
There may be times when having a noble class in the party can assist vided through forming Personal Connections, as described in the 
in ways far more subtle than in simple monetary terms. The rich Culture and Community chapter. This group pool of Luck Points 
tend to move in circles of power and influence; this means that a could be used by characters when involved in an investigative situa- 
character from a wealthy or noble social class can, when it is needed, tion where it is essential to gather clues and information to progress. 
draw on family and personal contacts that would otherwise be Instead of making skill rolls, such as Perception, Insight, Lore or 
denied to characters of a more lowly station. This is important in all something else, the characters can opt to spend a group Luck Point 
cultures, not just the civilised ones. to receive a vital piece of information in lieu of a skill roll. 

Sitting at the chieftain’s table places one closer to her ear or the Spending points in this way depletes the pool which will not 
ear of his advisers. High ranking nomads ride closer to the khan’s refresh until the next game session, but it does guarantee that char- 
caravan; highly placed primitive peoples may have influence with acters can, through judicious use and communal efforts, avoid the 
the tribal elders or high shaman. Rank brings influence, and influ- frustrations of bad dice rolls when searching for something they 
ence can be far more precious than money. Having disparate social need. A Games Master could even restrict the use of the group’s 
strata within an adventuring group should be viewed pragmatically Luck Points to non-combat situations only, which would further 
rather than with jealousy. Money isn’t everything, and influence in encourage their use for investigation. 
the right places can assist when money’s voice has fallen silent. Using Luck Points to automatically discover clues is a purely 

optional feature and always at the Games Master’s discretion — but 
they do provide a straightforward mechanism for conducting inves- 
tigation and research without complete reliance on the vagaries of 

InNvVEeSstTiIgGaAtTiIoOnNSs the dice; providing of course, that the investigation is not so complex 
Some scenarios rely more on research, mystery, intrigue, and that it burns through every available Luck Point. 

detective work than on the use of the weapons. The gathering of 
clues to solve a puzzle or mystery i3 an essential element of such 
adventures but one problem frequently encountered is the missing 
of vital clues through failed skill rolls. Of course, Games Masters UssSiInNgG PAaSsSsIioOnNSs 
are quite at liberty to make clues obvious or even hand them out Although Passions are offered as an optional rule in MYTHRAS, 
through roleplaying to ensure the smooth flow of the investigation, Games Masters are recommended to consider using them as an 
but this can take away some of the drama and excitement of uncov- active part of their games. 
ering a clue or piece of information through the skill rolls of an Throughout all kinds of fiction, and especially in fantasy, pas- 
investigative process. sion drives the plot. The desire to save the world from the evil dark 

The most vital aspect of well designed scenarios is that they have lord; to pursue and gain power; to quest for glory and lost wisdom; 
alternate means of reaching their conclusion. A scenario, especially to defend, find or avenge love. The variations are limitless and the 
one centred upon investigation, should never come to a juddering Passions system is capable of handling them all. 
halt if a crucial clue is not discovered. Even if a particular skill check Every individual is driven by some sort of passion. Passions both 
is pivotal to the plot, a good Games Master should ensure that what- inform and cloud choices. The heart governs the head, and rational 
ever the outcome, it pushes the storyline forwards. For example a thinking is replaced by that overwhelming compulsion a true passion 
failed investigative roll could result in: brings. There is nothing we will not do to save our loved ones. Our 

loyalty to leader or country drives us to selfless acts. Passions impel 
& False information which leads characters to jump to the 

us, and in MYTHRAS the Passions mechanics can help drive an entire 
wrong conclusion 

campaign. 
& Finding only part of the information which will lead them off 

Games Masters can use passions in a variety of ways, designing 
on a roundabout side plot 

entire scenarios around the feelings that a character holds for a par- 
& An intuitive itching that they are missing something, which 

ticular subject or antagonist. These can be very fulfilling for players, 
resolves itself in a dream or flash of inspiration soon after 

especially when they begin to vicariously experience the emotions 
& The interruption of the investigation attempt, preventing the 

gripping their characters. 
characters from locating the clue till they return at a later time 

The course of a campaign can hinge on a single passion. Con- 
& Arrival of a scroll or informant soon after, to get the charac- 

sider the Greek sagas and Shakespeare’s tragedies. In The Iliad, 
ters back on line, but at the expense of worsening the situation 

Troy is besieged because the love between Paris and Helen causes 

The secret is to never stonewall the characters, but always keep them to act in a specific way, forcing Agamemnon to seek bloody 

the story flowing. In some situations, such as a sandbox style cam- revenge. In Macbeth, Lady Macbeth’s ambition drives her weaker 

paign, reaching an impasse on one plotline does not prevent charac- husband to commit regicide, plunging the kingdom into tyranny, 

ters from continuing others in the meantime; but the Games Master paranoia, further bloodshed and, eventually, war. 

should make it clear that pursuing their investigation will, for the Passions, then, can play a crucial part in a campaign at a per- 
sonal level, or be at its heart and drive it, at a much higher level. 

282



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA COoMmBbAaTt STtYyLlEeSs 
Qver the course of her adventuring career; Anathaym has developed the 

When preparing for character creation, Games Masters should 
‘Hate Badoshi Warlords® passion. The Badoshi have continually threatened give some consideration to Combat Styles. To summarise what a 
her homeland but now she has been chosen to lead a delegation sent to negotiate 

style is: 
a crucial truce with these merciless barbarians. 

At the Badoshi fortress she s continually insulled, belittled, and chal- & The way a character has been trained to fight 
lenged — a typical Badosh: ruse that she ought to resist. The Games Master & The weapons with which that character has been trained, 
calls for Anathaym to roll against ‘Hate Badosh’ to see if;, finally, she can usually dictated by culture and career. 
resist the constant snide attempls to demean her positon. If her rollfals then 

MyTHRAS does not prescribe any limits on the number of weap- 
she can control her overwhelming feelings to extract vengeance; if it succeeds, 

ons a Combat Style can contain or cover. The primary reason for 
her hatred will overcome her, whach is what the Badoshi want. 

this is because such limits are always arbitrary, whereas a particular 
Her roll does, indeed, succeed, and she challenges the Badoshi champion to 

setting may have quite extensive training regimes. lor instance, a 
single combat, and kills kim. The Badoste Warlords expel the delegation afier 

Barbarian Hunter style may include weapons such as spear, sling, 
slaughtering half of them. Anathaym barely escapes with her own life. Way; 

bow, net and bolas whereas a Barbarian Warrior style may only 
not peace, s assured. The delegation has failed as a result of Anathaym’s 

include sword and shield. Of course, Games Masters can ensure 
hatred. The campaign will now follow a very different course due to the use 

that all Combat Styles in their campaign are balanced in the number 
of this Passwn. 

of weapons contained, but this is something that the Games Master 
Anathaym’s inabilaty to allow her head to rule her heart results in a poten- 

should establish as part of campaign preparation. 
tially disastrous outcome. It involved a straight roll against her Passion. How- 

There are, however, some recommendations we offer when 
even; consider thefollowing alternative. . . 

developing Combat Styles: 
Instead of a straight roll versus ‘Hate Badoshi Warlords® the Games 

Master rules that Anathaym should make an opposed roll of her hatred & Always consider the culture developing the style. Different 
against her Loyalty to Meeros’. Her Loyalty roll wins the contest. Although societies during different eras follow many diverse trends and 
Anathaym is filled with loathing for the treatment meted out to the delega- fashions. For example, with the introduction of gunpowder 
tion, her Loyalty prevails, and she weathers the insulls. The Badoshi are weapons shields began to fall out of favour, leading to a range 
secretly impressed by Anathaym’s conduct, and the peace negotiations continue of very different fighting styles that eschewed the shield as a 
although so do the insults. However, war is averted, and Anathaym returns protective instrument. Whereas in feudal Japan shields were 
lo her queen as a heroine: her head has ruled her heart, and many lives will 
be saved as a resull. 

Passions complicate choices, pose moral dilemmas and spur charac- 
ters to acts of great heroism or flawed villainy. Naturally the Games 
Master must exercise a certain caution if using Passions to drive core 
behaviours, but, if used wisely and subtly, Passions can transform a 
campaign from a series of set pieces into a truly epic saga of hero- 
ism, treachery, victory and defeat. 

Note that some players can find the use of passions in this man- 
ner an imposition, regarding it as a loss of personal control over their 
character; whilst others welcome the concept of using dice rolls to 
escape the responsibility of making a difficult choice, or simply enjoy 
the random vagaries of fate produced by rolling for such things. As 
such Games Masters should carefully consider whether passions suit 
their players, before introducing them in play. 

COoMmBbAaTt 
MyTHRAS combat can be deadly. A combination of good com- 

bat skills, Special Effects and weaponry can fell even the toughest 
opponent quickly. Here are some words of advice regarding combat 
generally and more specific situations. 

283



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

always very uncommon, even in the periods when archery ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
was considered the pre-eminent style of combat. Meeros_finally falls to the army of monstrous beasts, let into the city by 

& Try to ensure that Combat Styles do not include overlapping treachery. The populacef lees to the fortified acropolis upon which the queen’s 
weapons. If this is impossible, then a character should use the palace, and most important temples stand, but the gates fail to shut due to 
style most fitting to the current circumstances. For example some_foul sorcery which has welded their hinges solid. Facing total slaughter, 
a Barbarian Warrior trained in Sword, Spear and Bow may Anathaym stands in the gateway at the head of the remaining Scarlet Spears, 
also be trained in the Shield Wall Combat Style which focuses and invokes every magic at her command, determined to cut down as many 
on Sword, Spear and Shield. If the warrior finds himself in a monsters as she can before her soul travels to Myceras. 
shield wall situation then the Shield Wall Combat Style per- Up the ramp approaches a mass of centaurs, satyrs, and Panthotaurs, 
centage would be used for measuring his Sword and Spear led by their leader;, a massive minotaur bedecked in armowr, and wielding a 
capability — because the shield wall imposes a very different great axe. Io hus side stands the traitor Xenos, who grinsf iercely as he sees his 
fighting style. Similarly fighting from horseback requires hatedf oe preparing herself for her death. The minotaur king, and Anathaym 
very different weapon techniques to foot combat: a Cavalry recognuse one another’s status, and gesture to their fellows that this will be a 
combat style might contain Sword, overlapping with another single combat between heroes. 
style, and this would be used whenever a character engages in Both protagonists exchange many mighty blows back, andf orth before the 
combat when mounted. manotaur king suffers outrageous masfortune, hus gold painted hoof slipping on 

& Styles can include melee and ranged weapons. A thief, for a pebble, causing ham to drop his axe, andf all prone beneath the ready, glowing 
instance, trained in the Shadow Walkers style (dagger, shorts- tip of Anathaym’s spear. Instead of plunging home her weapon into the near 
word and garrotte, for instance), can reasonably be assumed helpless minotaws; she honourably salutes herformidable opponent, and takes 
to be able to throw his dagger as well as use it in hand to several steps backwards to allow ham to rise. The bull king recognises this act 
hand combat. Again though, culture and practice will deter- of merey, recovers his huge axe, and bellows that in exchangef or his life he will 
mine if; and when, a weapon can also be used in ranged cir- allow Meeros to stand, then orders his army to depart. 
cumstances. Some styles will almost certainly focus only on T he wrathful Xenos protests ths act, demanding the minotaur hack down 
ranged weaponry whilst others will focus completely on hand the presumptuous bitch, which the minotaur king blithely ignores. Finally, 
to hand combat. consumed by hatred, the pampered noble draws his own sword, and rushes 

& Discuss the different options with the players during character Jeroctously at Anathaym, screaming angrily with each strike. .. 
creation, and establish requirements according to each play- 
er’s character concept, culture and profession. Allow for flex- 
ibility and creativity, and point out weapon specific Special DeeAaTthH Is NoTt ThHEe 
Effects appropriate to their nature: this will help encourage 
creative use of Special Effects during combat scenes, leading ONnLlYy OPpTtIioOnN 
to more interesting fights. Victory need not, and should not, be dependent on killing every 

single opponent. An intelligent foe, beaten and helpless, is far more 
likely to surrender or call for mercy than fight to the absolute and 

You KNnooww,, THhiis IsnN'’tT bitter end. Captured opponents can be ransomed, questioned or 
even released in an honourable way, leading to perhaps a future alli- 

NEeCcEeSSssAaRYr.y.…. ance or a similar acts of mercy if the characters find themselves on 
It should be obvious when superior numbers, displays of skill, the losing side. Injured opponents may simply try to flee. Just about 

good arms and armour will make a fight very one sided. Characters every creature, sapient or not, seeks to avoid death and injury. 
should always, before secking to initiate combat, ask themselves if it MyTHRAS provides many tools for bringing a fight to a victori- 
is worthwhile; necessary; inevitable, or most important of all, if it is ous conclusion without wholesale slaughter. Characters should be 
survivable! encouraged to think about those options that can win a fight con- 

Fighting should always be a last resort with alternative means clusively without necessarily drenching themselves in blood to do so. 
— negotiation, trickery, or even retreating — being taken into consid- Special Effects such as Trip, Disarm, Press Advantage and Compel 
eration beforechand. Indeed, this can even form a phase of a poten- Surrender can all bring a fight to a satisfactory conclusion without 
tial combat, handled in Combat Rounds, but using social skills to death being a forgone conclusion. 
adjudicate a potential outcome. For example, Insight can be used 
to judge whether an opponent has the stomach for a fight, despite 

KiiLllLinngG HAass COoNnSsEeQqUuEeNnCcEeSs 
obvious bravado. Influence and Passions could be used to negotiate 

Whilst combat has always had pride of place in many roleplaying 
a peaceful outcome before weapons are drawn. 

games, especially MYTHRAS, it should be remembered that mindless 
Honourable and reasonable opponents will seek alternatives to 

violence and death are frowned upon by most cultures, for the basic 
fighting and not lose face in doing so. Creatures, if outnumbered or 

reason that it undermines society. Whilst killing is permitted in cer- 
cornered, will flee rather than risk life and limb. Consider what can 

tain circumstances, in times of war or in self defence perhaps, there 
be done to reduce the risk of injury and death before rushing in to 

are usually conventions to observe. For instance not even on the bat- 
deal damage. An opponent may have unknown magical reserves or 

tlefield is it always expected or even permitted to kill surrendered or 
skills that make even what seems like the most obviously one-sided 

helpless foes. 
fight something different entirely. 

Characters should scale any violent reaction proportionately to 
the event which triggered it, suited to the culture they are in. For 

284



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

example, a thief who attempts to rob characters in a back alley at outclassed by their opponents. Such encounters should pose a con- 
knifepoint rarely deserves to be slaughtered, since folks would con- siderable chance that they will be badly injured. 
sider frightening off the criminal, or at most giving him a beating, a Games Masters need to be aware of these limitations in MYTH- 
more than sufficient retort. Of course, if that thief was also a mur- Ras and structure their games accordingly. If combat becomes the 
derer who killed his victims then a more violent response would be focus of the campaign, occurring so frequently that there is little 
in order. time to heal naturally or recover magical resources between encoun- 

As a rule opponents in a fight are rarely willing to continue to ters, the characters will either be unable to complete their quests or 
the death unless driven by some overwhelming passion — be that be slain from the accumulation of crippling injuries. 
religious fanaticism, protection of a loved one, or seeking to sate Players, in particular, need to understand that when bloodied 
a need for vengeance. Generally, rather than death, foes will seek and bruised from one violent encounter, another in quick succession 
quarter, beg for mercy or attempt to flee. Killing at this point can is not the best way of making progress: hiding, fleeing or talking 
bring serious repercussions. their way out of trouble may prove to be far more beneficial. 

Of course mishaps occur when weapons are being swung, but 
unnecessary butchery soon brings a double-edged reputation. On 

AccTtionN PoiiNnTts ARrEe NOoTt 
one hand the characters will become known as men not to be trifled 
with, but conversely they will alienate themselves from those they ThHEe BEe ALlLl AanNDd EnNdD ALlLl 
ostensibly protect. Action Points certainly bestow advantage. Being able to do more 

Repetitive killing can draw unwelcome attention from local rul- in a combat round can make all the difference. However, characters 
ers whom rarely appreciate those who take matters of law or pun- that may feel penalized by only having 2 Action Points, rather than 
ishment into their own hands. Killing the wrong person can bring 3, (or 3 Action Point characters facing an creature with 4) still have 
retribution from a powerful patron or perhaps start a vendetta with many options available to help level the odds: 
a slain victim’s family; cult or brotherhood. A society usually has Speed Helps: Striking first, through a higher Initiative, offers a 
strict rules about death, even as part of an honourable duel or self significant advantage. Lightly armoured characters can exploit this 
defence. It may be something as simple as paying wergild to com- opportunity when facing slower, heavily armoured ones. 
pensate the family of the slain or might result in exile to avoid ongo- Numbers Matter: Outnumbering a foe can quickly resolve a fight 
ing disruption within the clan or settlement. because the foe cannot hope to use its own Action Points to effec- 

Games Masters are encouraged to consider what happens in our tively deal with two opponents who have 2 Action Points each. Con- 
own world to those who practice gratuitous violence upon members versely creatures that attack in packs use their weight of numbers 
of their own society. On the other hand it can be completely differ- to overwhelm their opponents, so numerical advantage should be 
ent to pursue the same degree of slaughter against an enemy culture, exploited when possible. 
race or species. Manoeuvring: A character who is outnumbered can make excellent 

use of the Outmanoeuvre Combat Action to keep multiple foes at 

PAaCcciInNgG COoMmBbAaTt ENnCcOoUuNnTtEeRrSs bay, buying time for help to come or simply remaining unengaged 

Unlike some roleplaying games, healing magic is not ubiquitous, (and possibly fleeing). 

meaning that injured characters are not going to be able to fall back Use of Weapons: Long weapons, such as spears, can hold an oppo- 

on a plethora of spells, potions and scrolls to regain lost hit points if nent at a safe distance limiting what can be done even with a supe- 

they lurch from one combat to another. Natural healing can be slow rior number of Action Points. And long weapons can be used to 

and if the characters are in an isolated location, far away from places injure— and whittle down — an opponent without him getting close 

offering rest and sanctuary, healing will take longer, and characters enough to attack. A long weapon impaled in a human-sized creature 

be placed at greater risk. will severely hamper its skills and movement, leading to a massive 

It is therefore imperative for Games Masters to carefully pace disadvantage regardless of its Action Points. Remember: a weapon 

violent encounters: too many and characters will soon die. Similarly, is a tool, and tools have multiple uses beyond the obvious. 

players will need to pace their activities according to any lingering Use of Special Effects: A common misconception is that special 

wounds or injuries. If every character in a party is injured and there effects such as Choose Location and Maximise Damage are the 

is no easy access to healing, magical or natural, a fight will be the last most advantageous. They are definitely effective, but when faced 

thing they need (unless they are all truly suicidal). with an opponent that has more Action Points those special effects 

Of course not all scenarios need not involve combat at all, instead that deny Action Points, or force them to be used for activities other 

relying on social interaction, good roleplaying and use of wits to suc- than attack or defence, are often better choices. An overextended 

ceed. However, those adventurers that do involve physical conflict foe cannot attack on his next turn. A disarmed foe has to spend an 

should limit themselves to several minor encounters, and one major. Action Point to draw another weapon. Bash can force an opponent 

Minor engagements are those where characters have signifi- out of engagement, making him expend an Action Point simply to 

cantly greater skills and perhaps armour than their opponents. Rab- regain it. 

ble and Underlings (see page 111) are often good fodder for these Never Ignore Defence: Another misconception is that, if an attack 

sorts of encounters, as are lone creatures whom the characters can against you fails, it makes little sense to spend an Action Point in 

gang up on. defending — it could be more useful for an attack. However, a suc- 

Major engagements should be used as the climax of a scenario, cessful defence roll against an unsuccessful attack generates a Special 

being battles where the characters are evenly matched or slightly Effect, and any opportunity to gain an advantage (especially if you 
have fewer Action Points) should not be ignored. All the defensive 

285



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

Special Effects have their uses, and some can easily dictate the out- of skills, here are some suggestions for also introducing challenges 
come of a fight. A Blind opponent suffers a significant disadvan- that are not so one-sided as to diminish players’ enjoyment. 
tage for 1d3 turns; Opening Range can afford the defender valuable Superior, but not overwhelming, numbers can help: take the par- 
breathing space. Try not to overlook the use of defensive opportu- ty’s size, and increase the number of opponents by two individuals. 
nities even when straight logic might dictate reserving Action Points Use packs of creatures, using pack tactics. Pack hunters, such as 
for an attack. wolves, rarely stalk alone. Size a pack as above, but have the pack 

Shields are Invaluable: 'Two handed weapons definitely do more work differently to sapient opponents: surrounding, harrying, wear- 
damage and wielding a pair of swords looks impressive, but there ing down, and then sending multiple numbers against the most help- 
is no substitute for a shield when it comes to pure defensive expedi- less seeming member. The party will be forced into measures that 
ence. Shields block the damage of large weapons and creatures very consolidate their numbers for safety and aim to drive the pack away. 
effectively, and are the only way to defend against ranged attacks. Exotic arms and armour. Have that raiding group of goblins attack 
But don’t underestimate their usefulness in other areas: Passive with nets and tridents rather than swords and shields, giving the 
Blocking keeps multiple locations defended, and a shield, when used opponents different Special Effect options that might be unfamiliar 
to Bash, is more effective than other blunt-force weapons. to the characters, such as Entangle. 

The best approach is a combination of all the above techniques Make use of ambushes and ranged attacks: ranged attacks can be diffi- 
in different circumstances. For one thing, combat becomes more cult to counter, and doubly so if the enemy has taken advantage of 
interesting and can yield some interesting results. Good and clever excellent cover. The characters will be forced to find ways of closing 
use of techniques and tools can truly level the battlefield when it whilst defending themselves, or be forced to use their own ranged 
comes to Action Point disparity, and the MYTHRAS combat system attacks, to counter even a modestly-skilled opponent. If characters 
has been carefully designed to take into account the myriad combat are surprised by an ambush, they will be forced to spend a round 
options available and the fact that opponents are not always evenly defending before they can counter attack, again making modestly 
matched. skilled opponents a hazard and challenge in the earliest stages of a 

fight. 
Consider use of magic. Sapient creatures are just as capable of using 

GRrAaDdIinNGg OPpPpOoNnEeNnTtSs 
magic as the characters. Equipping a set of foes with spells such 

“How should I grade opponents so that fights are balanced?” 
as Bladesharp and Demoralise can compensate for perceived lack 

This is a frequently asked question, especially by Games Masters 
of skill and force different tactics. A shaman, controlling several 

coming to MYTHRAS from roleplaying games that have structures in 
fetishes, can prove to be a match for any player-character spell caster 

place, such as experience and challenge levels, designed to maintain 
or well-armed fighters. Remember that sapient creatures have access 

party/opponent parity. 
to similar resources as characters: use them wisely, and this will help 

The easiest way is to match opponent and character numbers, 
grade the challenges characters face. 

with the opponent’s skills in roughly the same range (+/- 10%) as 
Have creatures fight according to their nature. 'The Creatures chapter 

the characters’ skills. However, this can lead to boring and repetitive 
gives more detail about how creatures tend to involve themselves 

combats — especially if neither the characters nor their opponents 
in combat: read and use these guidelines which will help in making 

use Special Effects to their full advantage. Combats are usually at 
fights with non-sapient creatures far more interesting and challeng- 

their best when opponents are challenging and not necessarily bal- 
ing for the characters. 

anced. So, in addition to giving opponents a certain parity in terms 
Use of local conditions and the environment. Adventurers are usually 

the strangers in a locale. This lends the incumbent species or oppo- 
nents a distinct advantage in using terrain, staging surprise attacks, 

ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA driving the characters into bottlenecks, and so forth. Many species 
The battle between Xenos, and Anathaym is epu, fuelled by years of are nocturnal or have excellent night-sight, making their attacks for 

building hatred. At furst the warrioress, despite her injuries, has the advan- more likely to occur during the hours of darkness, when characters 
lage; but Xenos uses his Hate Anathaym passion to boost hus Combat Style, should suffer from penalties due to the absence of light. Couple this 
granting him the greater skill, forcing her on the defence. Several blows later, with unfamiliar terrain, and even a simple fight may become very 
strengthened by lus brutal, unrestrained rage he culs through her spear shaft, challenging. 
and Anathaym is_forced to draw her shortsword. Never forget fatigue. Sustained effort equals fatigue. If characters 

Gloatingly Xenos describes what he’ll do to her sister once he has dealt have been travelling through difficult country with heavy loads, then 
with Anathaym, and the conceited queen who refused his marriage proposal. they may well be suffering from fatigue. Clever predators will keep 
T has incenses Anathaym so greatly that she uses her own Hate Xenos passion watch for many hours to ensure a potential opponent is worn down 
to augment her combat prowess. Then with consummate skill, she cuts off hus whilst it is still fresh and able. Use the fatigue rules to simulate the 
sword hand at the wrist. Xenos screams in agony, and drops to lus knees in toll on both characters and opponents. In this way, monsters that 
Jront of thefurous warrion. are seemingly very, very tough can be pitched against fresh-as-daisy 

Thas time there is no mercy in her heart. Heedless of the strident com- characters if the monster is tired or tiring. 
mands gwen her by the queen, and before anyone can interfere, she decapitates Ultimately ‘balanced’ encounters are less about relative combat 
Xenos — claiming the vengeance she has long sought. She has litle time to skills, hit points, armour and weapons, and more about tactics and 
savour her victory. All too soon she is disarmed by her Scarlet Spear compa- 
triots, and escorted to_face judgement by the senate for killing the one man she 
was_forbidden from harming 

286



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

use of the environment. Games Masters should never forget two help determine the outcome. Indeed, such mechanics can greatly 
things when developing encounter challenges for characters: speed up play and keep the action flowing. 

The task system, described on page 65, used for crafting and 
& Characters have Luck Points — these can be life-savers. 

manufacturing goods, can be tailored to help resolve social conflict 
& Characters are on the path to be being heroes— and should 

situations. The system is straight-forward: 
have the opportunity to act in this way. Stupidity and lack of 
planning should not be rewarded. « Instead of a Craft or similar roll, characters use their social 

skills: Commerce, Customs, Deceit, Insight, Influence, Ora- 
In MyTHRAS even relatively low-skilled opponents can still fell a 

tory, Passions and Willpower, as appropriate. 
mighty warrior with a 120% Combat Style if they are cunning and 

& The Games Master frames the social conflict setting: ‘Per- 
selective in their tactics. Likewise a character with a mere 40% in 

suade the senate to go to war’ for instance; ‘Defend your per- 
bow and arrow can still attempt to bring down the fire-breathing 

sonal honour’; ‘Cut a braggart down to size using cunning 
dragon. Experience with the combat mechanics will help shape chal- 

wit.” Next he decides how long achieving the objective is likely 
lenging encounters that include seemingly unbalanced opponents. 

to take. This could be a few seconds of verbal sparring; a few 
minutes of impassioned rhetoric; or many hours of detailed 

NOoNn--PPLlAaYyEeRr CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRr and tense negotiations. 
& The aim of the characters (or the opponent) is to score 100% 

STtAaTtIiSsTtIicC BLloOCcKkSs or more over the course of the conflict. Each participant may 
Although the Creatures chapter provides the same range of 

characteristics and attributes as for adventurers, Games Masters 
only rarely need this level of detail. And, in most circumstances, an ANnAaTtHhAaYyMm'’Ss SaAgGaA 
average of a species is perfectly fine without the need to roll a com- Anathaym faces her queen’s wrath for killing Xenos. The ruler had 
pletely bespoke example. expressly wanted the traitor alive, not only to gather information concerning 

When running an encounter likely to result in combat, the fol- how the city fell so quickly, but also to weaken the political power of certain 
lowing information is most crucial: members of the Senate. Worse still, Musogynistes, the father of Xenos, has 

charged Anathaym with breaking the ancient law forbidding the slaying of 
& Action Points, Initiative Bonus, Armour Point, Hit Points, 

a member of the sacrosanct_founding families. With her grip on the throne 
Movement Rate, Magic Points 

weakened by the devastating sack on Meeros, the queen has hitle option but to 
& Combat Style (with weapon values), Athletics, Brawn, Endur- 

let the trial continue. 
ance, Evade, Perception, Stealth and Willpower. 

The Games Master decides the trial takes place over the course of several 
& Important Traits. Unless a creature has a particular skill 

days, with each roll representing one day of game-time. As a guilty member 
useful in combat or other encounter situations, then a more 

of the conspiracy Maisogynustes uses his Deceit skill o musrepresent evidence 
detailed skill list is superfluous. If a skill is unlisted and Games 

against the warrioress, twisting well known tales of her years actwely perse- 
Masters need to assign a value in a hurry, give the opponent 

cuting lis son. To counter his honey-tonguedf abrications, Anathaym uses her 
or creature either 30%, 60% or 90% depending on whether 

Influence skill in an attempt to show that she has always faithfully served 
it can be expected to be poor, competent or good at the 

the ciy. 
required skill. For example, a group of characters encounter 

Day One: Anathaym’s Influence roll is a success, whilst Maisogynistes’ 
a troupe of centaurs and end up negotiating with them rather 

(stall overwhelmed by his son’s loss) fails. She scores 25% towards her goal 
than fighting; the Games Master has not listed Influence in 

of 100. 
the required statistics, but it can be assumed that at least one 

Day Two: This time Misogynistes scores a critical success whilst Ana- 
of the centaurs has Influence 60%, representing a reasonable 

thaym only succeeds. Both parties now have a score of 50%, and the trial is 
level of negotiation skill. 

neck, and neck, fuelling much impassioned debate in the taverns that evening. 
Day Three: Only Anathaym succeeds, as Misogymstes fauls to arrive at 

the senate house that day (automatic failure). Her stoic defence against the 
senate’s questions allows her to draw ahead with 75%. 

SocciiaALl COoNnFfLlIiCcTt Day Four: Anathaym s stunned lo silence when Musogynistes turns up, 
Social Conflict is the application of verbal and sociological tech- claiming that it was Anathaym herself who opened the city gates, and staged 

niques to force a change in thinking, behaviour or social standing. the battle with the minotaur king The forged scroll he presents as conclusive 
It can take many forms and need not be direct, but may ultimately proof of has son’s innocence, which details the looting of the city, bears the 
result in injury to reputation, personal honour, codes of conduct, wax impression of Anathaym’s own _famalial seal ring. Misogynistes wins a 
and so on. Various techniques are utilised which include trading critical whalst Anathaym fails entirely. 
insults, spreading rumours, uncovering scandals, personal argument, With has 100%, the senate finds the Champion of Meeros guilty of 
open debate, betrayal of secrets, and anything else one side or the Treason, the murder of Xenos, and attempted Regicide. She is sentenced to be 
other come up with. stoned to death immediately, before the senate house. 

The key recommendation for Games Masters is to roleplay, as Howeven, as the senators rise the sacred statue of Myceras groans with 
far as possible, social conflict situations. However there are many cyclopean displeasure, and topples as an earthquake strikes the ciby... 
players who feel uncomfortable of immersing themselves to this 
degree and prefer a mechanical method, more akin to combat, to And so Anathaym’s Saga concludes. For now... 

287



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

roll against the relevant social skill, and accumulate the result course place captured characters at some disadvantage, but will not 
for that particular period of sparring: unduly injure them. 
Critical: 50% The point at which Games Masters need to be careful is when 
Success: 25% placing traps intended to maim or kill in his scenario. Such devices 
Failure : 0% are not always intended to be easily bypassed or avoided. After all, 
Fumble: —25% it would be crass stupidity for the tomb of a powerful king to have 

& The first side to reach 100% or more wins the conflict, with traps which can be circumvented, since there is no reason for anyone 
any excess above 100 reflecting a greater degree of outcome. to enter the sepulchre once the dead ruler is interred. A palace trea- 
If the contest ends in stalemate, with two or more participants sury on the other hand, may need to be opened on a regular basis 
ending with the same 100%-+ score, then the Games Master and thus requires some secretive method of safe entry. 
has the option of permitting the contest to end in an unre- A properly designed death-trap should be — once triggered — 
solved standoff; or the leading contestants can make a straight utterly lethal otherwise it is not performing its function correctly. 
opposed roll between them, the victor of the roll winning the This however may be of little consolation to players whose charac- 
contest. ters have just been crushed to bloody pulp or lie at the bottom of a 

& The outcome may not be clear-cut, depending on the pit transfixed by stakes. When using such traps to guard important 
intended result, and will depend on whether the method of locations and treasures, the Games Master should provide plenty of 
invoking social conflict is direct or indirect. warning that ‘no man has ever returned from entering’ the infamous 

place. Clues can be placed in ancient scrolls describing its legend, 
This system can be applied to just about any form of social inter- 

carved across the entry as dire curses or even passed down by word 
action — not just conflict; attempting to seduce someone, for instance. 

of mouth by storytellers and burglars. 
The abstracted timeframe allows for actions that might take weeks 

No matter how deadly the trap, there should always be some 
to be condensed into a few minutes of dice rolls, hopefully supported 

method of escaping its effect, even if this is merely diving back the 
by some roleplaying to help add flavour, and not reduce something 

way they came. This is not the same as circumventing the trap, 
of fundamental importance to a purely mechanistic exercise. 

merely avoiding the worst of what occurs when it is set off. Yet 
Characters can change the skill used from one round to the next, 

because of the binary nature of resistance rolls in MYTHRAS, inju- 
as long as the skill is appropriate to the direction of the interac- 

ry-inflicting traps should be used sparingly as characters will even- 
tion. For instance, a character could start a debate with Influence 

tually fail their roll; although Luck Points can add considerably to 
in the first round, change to Oratory in the next, and then back 

survivability. 
to Influence in the third. Games Masters can force such a change 

Since most traps are but a single use, characters should some- 
depending on how the social conflict needs to play out, and how the 

times encounter traps which have already been sprung — often with 
outcome has been framed. In this example, the first round might 

the remains of a previous victim still caught upon them. This is 
simulate persuading a senator to table a motion before the senate. 

more relevant to traps built in long forgotten or abandoned places, 
In the second round the character is called upon to give a speech 

rather that those still frequented by living folks. In fact nothing pre- 
laying out his reasons; and in the third, the character must return to 

vents a scenario being designed around a necropolis of previously 
persuasion to swing the crucial vote in his favour. 

sprung traps with no active ones left, simply to unnerve the charac- 
ters. Conversely tomb maintenance could be the duty of a nearby 
cult or brotherhood, to ensure that the secrets of such places remain 

UssIinNgG TRrAaPpSs unsullied by acts of desecration. 
Due to the considerable investment of time (and sometimes 

Traps are a traditional element of tomb raiding or the protection 
money) required to construct traps, especially larger scaled devices, 

of famous treasures. Although their prevalence in Sword & Sorcery 
belies their actual rarity in historical record, this should not prevent it should be reasonably rare to encounter multiple incidences of 

the Games Master from using them as an important element of their them. Building a sprawling death-trap dungeon for example would 

scenarios. Some degree of thought should be given to the occur- require years of effort and a modest fortune to pay the workers, but 
to what purpose? There would be little chance of suppressing the 

rence, purpose and deadliness of traps however. 
The most commonplace traps are merely warning devices, used fact that the dungeon existed and rumours concerning its precise 

to alert guardians of whatever has been trapped. Scattering dried secrets might escape, unless of course all of its labourers were slain. 

leaves around a campsite or balancing a chair against the door of Depending on its ultimate intention, this might not be an issue. 
The constructor of a death-trap dungeon might wish for people 

a rented room in a tavern, are traps designed to reveal the presence 
to hear of its infamy, drawing them to an annual festival where 

of stalkers or thieves. These are good challenges to place against 
adventurers compete to survive the dungeon for the promise of a 

characters since the only outcome is the revelation of their presence, 
leaving them free to negotiate or flee as the circumstances denote. priceless reward. Equally the dungeon may guard the entrance to a 

royal necropolis, and its fame spread far and wide by display of dead 
Ensnaring traps are more often used by hunters to capture prey, 

thieves outside its entry — freely advertised and unguarded — to ensure 
usually for the purpose of gathering food. Yet pits, snares and drop- 

few ever try once the reputation of its deadliness is established. 
ping portcullises can just as easily be used against characters. They 
are also good to use against characters, especially when the noise 
of their triggering attracts those that set them, preventing sapient 
victims from freeing themselves or being freed by others. This will of 

288



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

consideration is language. If different races have trouble com- 
CRrEeAaTtUuRrEeSs AaSs PLlAaYyEerR municating, this can also lead to tensions and difficulties. 

& TIs the creature suitable? Some of the creatures in MyTHRAS 
CHhAaRrAaCcTtEeRrSs are intended to be non-player characters: contacts, arch-vil- 
A great deal of fun can be had with non-human characters, and lains, boss-monsters, and so on. A Gorgon, for example, 

one of the beauties of MYTHRAS is that just about any race can be would never make a suitable player character simply due to 
used in this way. Players will, no doubt, flip through the Creatures its nature and powers. This, again, comes back to the adage 
chapter and petition the Games Master to play an Ogre, Minotaur, that just because a creature can be played as a character, it 
or even a Gorgon or Dragon. What is a beleaguered Games Master does not mean that it should — or was even intended to be. 
to do? 

Just because a creature can be played as a character does not 
CuuULltTuURrEe,, CAaRrEeEeRrSs aAnNDd DEeVvEeLloOPpmMEeNnTt 

mean that it should. The Games Master is always the final arbiter and 
Where a non-human race is acceptable, the Creatures chapter 

even uncontroversial choices, such as dwarves and elves, may not be 
offers some guidance on developing a species with an appropriate 

in keeping with the flavour of a campaign. The Games Master must 
culture, career, and so forth. Where such guidance does not exist, 

base his decision on the following considerations: 
the character creation rules are flexible enough to be applied to just 

& How well does a particular race fit with the nature and themes about any race without special rules or requirements. Choose a cul- 
of the campaign? Any creature but humans would be out of tural background that reflects the creature’s type, a profession that 

place in an historical setting for instance. Whereas a high fan- fits with its description and culture, and then continue the character 

tasy campaign could be assumed to have one or more elder creation process as for humans. Where a species has character devel- 
races (a common high fantasy theme). opment notes included, use these in preference to the human char- 

& TIs the creature sapient? Sapience denotes free will, informed acter creation system; you may also find that these notes fit several 

decision-making and the capacity to act in a rational, judg- other species and they need not be considered unique or restricted. 

mental way rather than one based on instinct. Sapient char- 
acters are far casier to relate to and therefore play, than those 
which are merely sentient. Of course, some sentient creatures 
may have been raised to sapience through magic or other MAaGgIiCc 

What types of magic are used and how common they are, are 
means, and therefore be applicable for play, but generally true 
sapience is the key. specific to the campaign. A magically rich campaign could have all 

& What is the creature’s level of power when compared with five of the magical disciplines whereas a low-magic campaign might 

the rest of the characters? As a rule of thumb, Games Mas- have only one, reflecting a single, dominant power in the universe. 

ters should deter players from choosing creatures that are Games Masters must carefully consider how prevalent magic will be 

clearly much more powerful than the other characters. The in the world before allowing players to develop magic-using charac- 

casiest way to measure power levels are to compare attri- ters. Not all of the magical disciplines need to be used, and indeed, 

butes. Creatures with substantially more Action Points, sig- some uniquely interesting combinations can be created by mixing 

nificantly higher Damage Modifiers, high Hit Points and nat- and matching them. 

ural armour, will have a large advantage over more modest With five separate magic systems Games Masters have a great 

character types. This can prove to be difficult when it comes deal of choice when it comes to deciding what types and levels of 

to balancing encounters for the whole party and it may also magic should be present in the campaign. Some points for all Games 
Masters to consider: 

cause resentment amongst other players — especially if, in 
combat situations, the creature character clearly hogs the & What is magic’s presence? Is it extremely rare and in 
limelight. the hands of only a few, fabled practitioners, or is it more 

& How will the creature fit in with other races? Both Games common-place? 
Masters and players need to consider questions of prejudice, & Ts magic a specialised art, relegated to members of only a few 
social acceptance, and general logistics of mixing races in careers that dedicate their lives to its pursuit? Or is it possible 
the same group. A group may find it is barred or banished for all careers to learn magic in some form, irrespective of 
from many areas if it contains a troll or chaos hybrid in its how rare it is? 
number; worse, it may attract attacks from those who seek to & How is magic viewed by most societies? If magic is relatively 
stigmatise and punish difference. A group with a giant as a rare then the chances are that most people will view it with 
member will likely strike terror from many kilometres away awe, respect and, perhaps, suspicion and fear. If it is more 
and, even if they do not, find that the giant character simply common then magic may be something that, whilst remark- 
cannot enter a city’s walls due to its size, thereby causing the able in its own way, is an accepted part of daily life. 
player to sit-out much of the fun. Another consideration is 
that of tolerance within the group. Different races have radi- Which of the magic systems will be represented in your 

cally different views regarding morality, and these might be so campaign? 

disparate as to lead to intra-party conflict and strife. A further Folk Magic — magic may be restricted to very simple, local effects 
that are understood primarily by hedge wizards, witches, wise men 
and women, and so on. Much is based on folk-lore and a deep 
understanding of the natural world, coupled with certain powers 

289



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

that may be inherited through a bloodline or awoken through expo- some form of ruling class, which will, eventually, seek to con- 
sure to such knowledge. solidate and protect its position. How does this influence the 

Anmimism — the spirits are vital entities to the world and com- lower social strata? Is magic used to control the populace or 
munion with them a natural part of life. Whilst animists are often oppress them? Do certain forms of magic corrupt spiritually 
viewed as primitive, there are many civilised and sophisticated soci- and morally? Have other magical paths been forgotten but 
eties practicing animism, such as the Shinto religion of Japan. could be awoken in some way? 

Mpysticism — ascetics seek to enlighten themselves through a per- 
sonal understanding of reality and control over their bodies’ unre- 
alised potential. Mysticism is prevalent in many cultured societies 
that have their basis in reason, rationality and deep philosophical CuulLltTs AanNDd 
understanding. Mysticism is not necessarily a religious path though, 
and may be found in many secular societies. BRroOTthHEerRhHoOOoDdSs iInN 

Sorcery — sorcery implies that mortals have mastered the arcane 
laws of the universe and bend them to their will. The gods may not tThHEe CAaMmPpAaIigGnN 
exist, may be absentee landlords, or their worship has diminished to The Cults chapter provides an extensive range of bare-bones cults 
the point that they cease to be relevant. Sorcerers, especially the very for Games Masters to develop, depending, of course, on whether or 
powerful ones, may be looking to fill this gap, and assume a godhead not cults form an important part of the campaign. Although cults 
role themselves. This is a typical trope of most Sword and Sorcery. have always been an integral part of MYTHRAS, there is no need to 

Theism — this implies that the gods exist, and are prepared to make them the focus of attention or indeed, even include them at 
allow their powers to be channelled and used by mortals in return all. There are some excellent reasons for their inclusion: history and 
for worship. This is typical of many ancient myths and religions, par- fantasy include many cult examples, and some ancient societies were 
ticularly those of the ancient world such as India and Mesoamerica. defined by them. But some settings may use cults very differently: 

Whatever combination of styles you choose for your campaign— 
and there is no need to have all five present, unless you desire a truly & Cults may be rare or difficult to join, being restricted to 

magic-rich campaign — study the magic systems carefully: certain cultures, social classes, or careers. Only a small elite 
might be entitled to progress through the cult ranks. 

& Understand how they work and what powers they grant to & Some fantasy genres — Swords and Sorcery in particular — 
their practitioners. Reading a spell on its own is not enough: depict the universe as a cold, uncaring place where the gods 
the mechanics for each magic system can enhance an individ- are largely absent, and cults are reserved for a tiny minority 
ual spell’s effect considerably. who are bent on achieving power at all costs. In such cases 

& Do different cultures practice different magical traditions? cults are the province of powerful non-player characters (typ- 
Experiment with different themes. Perhaps the barbarians of ically malevolent sorcerers), and form the focus of characters’ 
the steppes are masters of sorcery whilst the civilised cultures opposition. 
cleave to spirit worship. Maybe only the superstitious primi- & Worship of gods simply has little or no overt organization. 
tive tribes believe in the gods whilst the nomads - arch-sur- Worship is personal and although temples and clerical classes 
vivalists — have developed many mystical traditions to aid in exist, there 13 no established hierarchy of progression outside 
their daily life. of a purely clerical career — which may be highly restrictive in 

& Choose what spells will be made available. Games Masters terms of adventuring. 
should not feel compelled to make every spell listed for a magic & In worlds or settings where magic is rare or absent, cults 
type available. Some will be unknown, rare, or extremely dif- are purely a social mechanism rather than one that offers 
ficult to learn. Some will not be appropriate to the flavour of benefits for its initiates: cults therefore provide background 
the campaign. Build your own spell lists. Doing so will help colour rather than an integral game mechanic for magical 
manage players’ expectations when choosing magic, and give development. 
the Games Master control over magic that could be overly 
powerful in a campaign’s early stages. You can always expand So, give some thought to the place and role of cults in the cam- 

your list later. Indeed, magical research can be a very good paign. Many settings— and some published specifically for MyTH- 

driver for certain scenarios. RAS — will use them extensively, whilst others may include them to a 

& Decide what magic will be available to characters at char- much lesser degree. Brotherhoods, on the other hand, are likely to 

acter creation. Do characters need to join a cult to learn be far more common: people, being social animals, naturally form 

higher magic? Can they choose magic-using careers from brotherhoods and societies for mutual support, advancement and 

the very start, and develop cult membership (or some other protection. Brotherhoods can effectively replace cults in some set- 

form of magical education) as a part of character creation? tings, or happily co-exist with them. 

Should they have any magic at all? Might gaining access to it, If cults are to be used, they require a little work. Cults can be as 

through adventuring and experience, be the route to magical detailed or as nebulous as one desires; but to get the very most from 

power? Many fantasy stories use this premise very success- 
fully as a way of showing individual journeys of discovery 
and realisation. 

& Consider what consequences a magical type will have on the 
world. Magic is a path to power, and all paths to power lead to 

290



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

a cult, the following framework elements can be used as the basis for 
HiistToORrYy AanNDd COoNnTtEeXxTt 

developing a fully-realised cult. 
What is the history behind the cult? What role does it play in 

& Concept society? Much depends on the cult’s size, but small cults can be very 
& Object of Veneration powerful in a local area, and large ones weak when their influence is 
& History and Context spread across distances. 
& Myths 

& Who founded the cult, or how did it come into being? 
& Magic and Powers 
& Obligations and Deficits & When was it founded — recently or long ago? 

& How has it maintained its position — has it changed over time? 
& Membership and Ranks 

& Does the cult have enemies? What other cults is it affiliated 
« Training 

with? 
When developing a cult, approach each element in order, allow- & Ts the cult part of a pantheon? How does it contribute to the 

ing ideas to build, based on the decisions made for the preceding overall myths of that pantheon? 
element. Although the following steps are phased specifically for cult & Does the cult worship differently, or believe different things to 
organisations, the same elements can be applied for the creation of similar cults? If so, is it considered heretical? 
Brotherhoods too. & What social services does the cult offer to its lay members? Is 

it a beneficent cult or inherently selfish? Does it care a jot for 
the welfare of others? 

COoNnCcEePpTt 
& What is the cult’s future? Are new members being attracted 

What is the basis of the cult? Is it a formal religion covering an 
or is its influence on the wane? Are new beliefs eroding old 

empire, a nation, a community or a small body of people? Is it, 
ones from within? 

perhaps, outside of an over-arching religion due to a difference of 
belief, although agreeing with it on most aspects of orthodoxy? Is The history and context should be a narrative that addresses 
the god living or dead? Is the god represented by a prophet or ideal some, or all, of the above questions. Again, it need not be too com- 
that forms the basis of the belief? Is the cult focused on worshipping plex or detailed, growing instead through game play and continued 
a particular aspect of a god’s nature? Is the focus of the cult a char- Games Master development. 
ismatic individual who might become a god? Or is it a personality 
of such heroic, charismatic stature that veneration is the only way to 

MyyYtThHSs 
show the appropriate love and respect? 

Many cults have myths. A myth is a story or set of stories that 
The concept need not be detailed, but it needs to have a sub- 

describe and exemplify what the cult stands for and how it behaves. 
stantive hook for the rest of the framework. It might be as simple as 

Myths are, typically, timeless and concern the deeds of gods or the 
a sentence, or a more detailed paragraph or so that clearly outlines 

object of veneration. They may be considered unassailable truths, 
the concept. Do not feel compelled to go into too much conceptual 

or stories that provide a meaning or parable, but are known to be a 
detail. Concepts change over time, so if the concept is relatively sim- 

work of fiction. The important fact is that a myth explains, teaches 
ple and straightforward, it is easier for characters to understand and 

and promotes the ethics, values and behaviours of the cult. 
depth will come through active gameplay. 

Myths can be as simple or elaborate as the Games Master wishes 
them to be. Many myths concern the eternal questions of: 

OBbJjEeCcTt oOFf VEeNnEeRrAaTtIioOnN 
Ciults are usually formed to venerate someone or something. The & How was the world made? 

object of veneration for the cult — its heart and focus — should be & How did people come into being? 

defined. There are many different kinds of objects for veneration & How does the venerated being handle certain challenges and 

but the most common are: problems? 
& How were enemies defeated? 

& A single god or goddess — such as Zeus, Odin or Gurghul & How will the world follow its course and how might it end? 
the Avenging God of Foetid Mists. Or a group of gods and & What does the object of veneration do for me? 
goddesses — a pantheon. 

& An aspect of a god or goddess’s nature — one particular form Itis usually the case that no one knows who created the myth and 

of behaviour that adherents find sacred. how it came into being; a myth simply is — whether written down or 

& Someone who embodies both the nature of mortals and gods communicated through word of mouth. Myths are typically unques- 

— a demigod. tioned (although the myths of other cults, especially where they 

& A holy prophet or messenger. conflict with a cult’s own myths, may certainly be challenged, even 

& A creature or monster of singular power A charismatic indi- violently), even when it is known that much is fabrication, because 

vidual, either living or dead, who inspires love and devotion the power of the lesson is inherent in the myth’s structure. It is easier 

— a Personality or Hero cult to reinforce behaviour if one tells a story to show that behaviour 

& A philosophy of existence leading to some form of unearthly in action, rather than simply listing a set of rules and restrictions. 

reward — Buddhism, for instance. Children are particularly receptive to the power of myth, and cults 

& An object or relic of power or significance. ensure that myths form a part of a child’s education so that patterns 
of behaviour and belief can be established early-on. 

291



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

Myths become ingrained into the psyche and enforce certain Initiation involves a ritual of some form. The precise nature can 
patterns of behaviour. Stronger myths are more successful at this. be defined as part of the cult framework, and can take any of a 
Tor every myth created, decide what forms of behaviour it seeks to number of forms: some examples are: 
exemplify. These should be simple, clear statements such as... 

& Initiation ritual involving much pomp or ceremony, such as a 
& Lying is wrong communion rite, baptism or other, symbolic acceptance into 
& Bravery is necessary the cult’s ways 
& Tricksters cannot be trusted & Trial or ordeal 
& Hospitality to enemies and friends is essential & Vigil, fasting or abstinence 
& Hard work provides the best rewards & Swearing of a binding oath 

& Making a sacrifice 

MAaGgIiCc Performing the initiation ritual can either be a focus of a role- 
playing session, or, for simplicity, abstracted to a roll against a par- 

What magic can a cult offer to its members? This is dependent 
ticular skill (such as Endurance, Willpower, or a Passion). Once the 

on a number of things: 
Initiation rite is complete, and if the initiate meets any prerequisites 

& Whether or not the cult reveres a god, personality or ideal — for membership, then he is considered a Dedicated Member. 
the latter two cannot offer Theist Magic, but may be able to 
offer Animism, Mysticism, Sorcery or Folk Magic. 

TRrAaIinNIinNgG 
& If the cult offers Magic to its membership. Some cults don’t 

Clults may teach skills as part of the rewards offered to their 
provide any magic at all, or limit it to those of higher cult 

active members, and look for certain skills when recruiting mem- 
rank than the common members. 

bers. The kinds of skills offered reflect two things: the cult’s nature 

The sample cults in the Cults and Brotherhoods chapter give and purpose (pious, peaceful cults will focus on lore and commu- 

ample examples of the ranges of spells and types of magic available, nication skills; martial cults will offer weapon skills); and the kinds 

but Games Masters can be creative. Theist cults might also offer of qualities the focus of veneration exemplifies. Therefore, as part 

sorcery as part of their nature; or sorcery orders might also worship of the cult framework process, give some thought to the following 

a particular god who offered sorcerous knowledge as a gift. questions when choosing cult skills: 

& What skills does the object of veneration display and promote? 

OBbLlIigGAaTtIioOnNSs AanNDd DEeFfIiCcIiTtSs & What skills are used in the myths fundamental to the cult? 
Obligations and Deficits are another framework method for & What skills are important to the cult in achieving its aims? 

enforcing certain kinds of behaviour. Essentially, cult members & What skills might members naturally bring to the cult, given 
are rewarded for acting in the right ways and penalised for acting the culture and campaign background? 
against the behavioural norms of the cult. These things can take dif- 

Cults tend to offer training in order to enforce certain kinds of 
ferent forms and it is up to the Games Master to decide which (and 

behaviour, but also to make sure that the cult is equipped with what 
they can be mixed and matched) are most appropriate to the cam- 

it needs to achieve its goals and ensure its survival. Training happens 
paign and thus available as part of the Cult Framework. The Cults 

in several ways: 
chapter offers several different ways of creating obligations and defi- 
cits through the use of taboos, geases and superstitions. These are & Through dedicated training academies, supported by the cult 
regular tropes in myth and fantasy, and often used as the basis for & Through the indenturing of lower ranks to higher ones 
adventure and stories. & Through mentoring and required study 

& Natural transfers of knowledge through religious ceremonies, 

MEeMmBbEeRrSsHhIiPp AanNDd RAaNnKkSs festivals and services 

This cult framework element is of substantial importance to & Through the teaching of myths and beliefs. 

both cults and characters. It defines how people join the cult and Consider which ways are available through the cult. There is no 
what stages are open to them through cult progression. Becoming a 

need to formalise each and every academy, rite, mentor, and so on; 
member of a cult can be as simple as proclaiming worship of a god, 

simply a consideration of which methods of teaching suit the cult 
following of personality or ideal, or undergoing some form of initi- 

the best. 
ation rite. For most, this is enough for their personal requirements, 
and they will progress no further in the cult and have no desire to 
do so. RouNnDdIinNGg OuuTt tThHEe Cullt 

However, the more steadfast and devout — those who want to Having worked through this framework, you should have a good 

make a real commitment to the focus of their veneration — must idea of a cult’s focus, function, history, myths, magic and structure. It 

go somewhat beyond the Common Membership requirements and is now time to apply some finishing touches that can be used during 

become Dedicated Members. These dedicate themselves to the gameplay. None of these finishing elements are crucial, but they 

inner workings of the cult and place themselves on a track for pro- offer completeness. 

gression, allowing the cult to become the focus for their activities. 
& Roll 1d4+1 — this s the number of Holy Days the cult observes 

during the year. Atleast one day will mark the founding of the 

292



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  GAaMmEeSs MAaSsTtEeRrYy 

cult, and one will mark another major point of importance, 
reflecting a key myth or deed (such as the martyrdom of a 
prophet or hero). Decide where in your game calendar these 
Holy Days will appear and their importance to members 
of different ranks. The founding day and additional day of 
importance will be marked by all cult members; other days 
may be marked by only one rank and hold lesser significance. 
What are the ceremonies for the cult? How is worship con- 
ducted? Are ceremonies formal and highly ritualised, or are 
they loosely structured and simple in approach? Do different 
Holy Days require different ceremonies? Be as vague or as 
detailed as you wish, but assemble some notes on what cer- 
emonies usually require, using myths, history and other ele- 
ments of the cult framework to determine what they consist 
of. 
Where is the cult’s home? This might be obvious, if the cult 
is local to a small community, but large cults generally have 
a base of focus, where the major temple, church or shrine is 
located. Agree this with the Games Master. 
What happens to those who stray from the cult’s path, betray 
its ideals or attempt to leave the cult? Are magical punish- 
ments enforced? Are apostates condemned to death? Is there 
no sanction at all? Consider the cult’s nature, and outline the 
punishments, if any, for going against the cult’s ideals. Some 
cults use the threat of punishment as a propaganda tool to 
enforce behaviour but may never carry out the threat; others 
will do so rigorously and publicly. 

293



Mythras:  Index

o X 2 % o F W KT KX KES P XN 

Index

o X 2 % o F W KT KX KES P XN 

 Armoouurr  57 Crreatinngg a  136 
A Armoouurr Mataeterriiaall Types  58 Bleed  96 
Abbjjure  166 Armoouurr Penaallty to Iniitiativve  58 Bleeding  41 
Abbssoorrpttion  182 Arrrowccutt  157 Blless Crrops  183 
Acccciideennttaall Injuury  96 Arrt  44 Blinnd Oppppoonneenntt  96 
Accommmodoadtatiion  58 Assiipatra  226 Blood Losss  2,, 68,, 71,, 75,, 78,, 96 
Acceepphhaallii  225 Assphhyyxxiiated  41 Blood Sense  215 
Accid  2, 68 Assphhyyxxiiaatioon  2, 43, 68, 71, 755,, 7766,,7 788,, 144,, 174 Bludgeon  124 
Accrroobbaattiics  44 Assssesss Situuatioonn  93 Boar  230 
Acctting  44 Assttrall Projjectioon  157 Boaar-Kin  232 
Accttion Poiintts  8 Atthhlleettiics  38 Boaatting  39 

Maannaaggiing  285 Atttack  91 Body Snatching  141 
Accttiion,, Timme and Moovveemeenntt  2,, 68,, 69 Atttacks and Paarrrriies  94 Bonacon  232 
Adhheession  157 Atttract  167 Bonus Skiilll Poiintts  34 
Aeeggiis  182 Atttributtes  5,, 8 Brace  91 
Aeerriiall Taccttiics  103 Augmeennttiing Skiillls  50 Brawwn  39 
Age  33 Aurra  157 Breaking  39 
Aggeeing  2,, 34,, 68, 700,, 71,, 166 Aurrochs  226 Breath  124 
Aggeentt  29 Avveerrt  123 Breathe Flaamme  215 
Age Tablle  34 Awaaken  182 Breathe Waatter  183 
Aimiing  107 Awaarreenneesss  158 Brotherhoods  193 
Alarmm  123 Burreaucracy  45 
Allchemiisst  29 Burrower  215 
Alllerggy  215 B Bypaasss  124 
Alllies  2,, 22,, 25, 20077,, 2088,, 2099,, 210 Babbblle  123 Bypaasss Armoouur  96 
Ammmumnuintitioonn,, Ranged Weeaapon  62 Baboon  227 
Annaatthaayymm’’s Saga  7,, 111,, 17,, 21,, 29,, 34,, 41,, 50,, 54,, Background Eventts  18 

56,, 58,, 70,, 74,, 77,, 80,, 87,, 89,, 90,, 92,, 101,, Backllash  183 C 
1102,, 1109,, 111,, 123,, 184,, 193,, 1197,, 1198,, Baggiinii  227 Caallcuullate  124 
204,, 205,, 2066,, 2833,, 2844,, 2866,, 287 Bakru  228 Caalllinng on the Gooddss  178 

Anncceessttor Spiirriit  147 Bane Spiirriits  147 Caalll Wiinds  184 
Quueessttioning  147 Baniish  167 Calmm  124 

Anncceessttor Spiirriits  145 Barbarian  14 Caamoouuflflaged  215 
Anniimaatte  166 Baarrterinng and Haagggglling  55 Caappiing  50 
Animismm  130 Bash  96 Caarreeeerrs  28 

Binding  1130,, 131 Baassiiliskk  229 Caarreeeerrs by Cuulltturrall Backgroundd,, examppllees  28 
Spiirriit Damaagge  131 Bear  230 Caasst Maaggiic  91 
States of Being  130 Beeaassttccaalll  124 Ceennttaur  233 
Trance  130 Beeaasst Formm  183 Chhaaiinmaaiill  57 
Trance Preparatioon Timm e  131 Beeaasst Haannddller  29 Chameelleon  184 
Whhaatt Arre Spiirriits?  130 Beeeettllee,, Giiant  230 Chaange Range  91 

Animismm Tricks  140 Befudddlle  124 Chaaos Aurra  215 
Anntt,, Giiantt  225 Beholld  183 Chaaos Feature  215 
Apppprraaiise  123 Beezainted  57 Chaaos Features  275 
Aqquuaattiic  215 Bind Ghhoosstt  183 Chaaos Hyybbrriid  234 
Arriise  96 Binding  44,, 131 Chhaarraacctter Coonncceeptt  6 

294



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  InNdDEexX 

Chhaarraacctter Immprovemeentt  2,, 68,, 71 As Pllayer Chhaarraacctteerrs  289 Diice Ussed inn the Game  5 
Chhaararactceterriissttic  5 Deessiigning Your Own  223 Diifffferenttiiall Roolll  5 
Chhaararactceterriissttic Drraain  215 How Crreeaatturres Fight  220 Diifffferenttiiall Roollls  51 
Chhaararcatceterirsisttiics  6 Intelliiggeennce and Instinct  214 Diifffificulty Grradees  38 

Increasinng  72 Unarmed Combbaatt Coonnssiiddeerraattions  221 Diimiinniish  167 
Chharaarcatcetreirsisttiiccss,, Caallcullatinng  8 Crreeaatturres as Chhaarraacctteerrs  218 Diisarrmm Oppppoonneenntt  97 
Chhaarrging  102 Crriitticall Successs  37 Diisease  68,, 74 
Chhaarrismma  8 Crrooccooddililee//AAllliigator  237 Trraaiits  74 
Chhilill  124 Cuullt Meemmbebresrshhiip  2,, 36 Diisease and Poisoon Coonnddititions  75 
Chiimeerra  236 Cuulltts  114 Diisease Immmuunniitty  215 
Choooosse Loccatioon  96 Avvaaiillaabbiillity by Cuullture  196 Diisseases and Poiisonss,, Treatinng  46 
Ciirccuumvventt Coovveer  96 Beenneefifitts  199 Diisseeaasseess,, Sampplle  75 
Ciirccuumvventt Parry  97 Coommpapraartatiive Rank Tiitles  197 Diisguiise  45 
Ciivviilisseed  14 Cuullt and Brotherhhood Ceennttrres  205 Diisheevveell  125 
Clleanse  125 Deemmonosntsrtarattiions of Woortrthhiineesss  196 Diismiisss Elemeennttaall  185 
Cllear Skiies  184 Diivine Interventioon  201 Diismiisss Maaggiic  185 
Cllimmbing  38 Geeaasa  204 Diisruptioon  125 
Cllose Combbaatt Giifftts  201 Diistance Pennaallttiies  108 

Engagemeentt  101 Maaggiic  200 Diither  91 
Situuatioonall Moodidfiifiers  101 Mataeterriiaall Aiid  200 Diivine Interventioon  201 

Cllose Range  97 Meemmbebresrshhiip  195 Diiving Strike  215 
Cllosing Range  107 Moonansatseterriies  206 Doommininaatte  167 
Cllothing  59 Oaatths  203 Drragon  238 
Cloud Caalll  184 Progrressioon  196 Drriive  40 
Coocckkaattrriice  229 Prottectioon  200 Drrop Foe  97 
Coolld-Bloooded  215 Ranks  196 Drrop Weeaapon  93 
Coollleges  194 Reessttrictioons  201 Drrownniing  2,, 68, 711,, 237 
Combbaatt Sampplle  206 Dry  125 

Comppoonneennttss of  86 Shrrines  206 Duck Back  97 
Gameess Maassttery  283 Socciiall Status  200 Duulllblade  125 
Pacing  285 Suppeerrssttiitioons  203 Dwwaarrf  239 

Combbaatt Accttions  91 Taboos  204 
Free Accttions  92 Temppllees  206 
Proaaccttive  91 Traininng  199 E 
Reeaaccttiive  92 Whhy Join?  194 Earthquake  185 

Combbaatt Round  5 Cuulltts and Brotherhoods inn the Camppaaiign  290 Earth Sense  158, 215 
Combbaatt Styles  112,, 86 Cuulltts and Miriraacclles  179 Echoolloccatioon  158,, 215 
Combbaatt Stylless,, Sampplle  87 Cuulltts & Brotherhoods  192 Economiiccs & Equipmeentt  54 
Combbaatt Style Trraaiits  89 Cuulltturraall Skiilll Poiintts  13 Elemeennttaalls  241 
Coommbabta,t, Unnuussuuaall Coonnddititions  106 Cuullture  45 Elemeennttaall Spiirriits  148 
Commmerercce  45 Cuullture & Commmunuintity  13 Elemeennttaall Summoonniing  185 
Commmuunnaall Miind  215 Curre Maallady  185 Elephant  256 
Commmunuintity  21 Cuurrse  125 Ellf  243 
Comnnbbaatt Stylless,, Weeaapon Chhooiices  88 Cuurrse Spiirriits  147 Enchantt  168 
Comppaanniieess  194 Custoomm Caarreeeerr,, Crreatinngg a  33 Encumbbrraancce  2,, 56,, 57,, 68,, 77 
Comppeell Surrender  97 Customs  40 Allternaattive Ruulles  77 
Coonncceeaall  39 Cyycclle  5 Caappaacciity  77 
Coonnnnecetcitioonnss,, Personaall  22 Cyycclles  90 Non-Human 
Coonnnneeccttiions Tablle  25 Cyyccllops  237 Armoouurr ENC  77 
Coonnsseeccrraatte  184 Enduurrance  41 
Coonnststiitutioon  7 Enduurrance and Wilillpoweerr,, Limiitts to  44 
Coonnttaacctts  2,, 22,, 25,, 81 D Enggiineeering  46 
Coonntteessted Roollls  50 Damaagge and Woound Levveells  109 Engguullffiing  216 
Coonntteesstts of Streenngth  39 Damaagge Moodidfifiier  8,, 107 Enhance (Chhaararactcetreirsisttiic)  169 
Cooooll  125 Damaagge Reduuccttion  94 Enhaanncceemmenetnsts,, Equipmeentt  67 
Coooorrddiinaattion  125 Damaagge Weeaapon  97 Enhance Parry  97 
Copppeer Piece  54 Daancce  40 Enllarge  169 
Coouunntter Speelll  92 Daark Sight  158,, 215 Enttangglle  97,, 186 
Coouurrttesan  29 Deeaath Sense  215 Entteerrtainer  30 
Coouurrttesy  45 Deeaath Spiirriits  148 Enntthhrraalll  186 
Coouurrttiier  29 Deecceeiit  40 Equipmeentt Cuullture/Miillieu  57 
Coovveer  102 Deellay  91 Equipmeentt Maannuufafacctturring and Quuaalliity  65 
Crraabb,, Giiant  236 Deenniiaall  158 Equipmeentt Price  56 
Crraafftt  45 Deessiigning A Chhaarraacctter  6 Equiipmeenntt,, Startinng  34 
Crraafftter  30 Deevvoottion  45 Evade  41,, 92 
Crreatinng Chhaarraacctteerrs  280 Deevvoottiionaall Pooolls  180 Evading  103 
Crreature Comppeetteencce  219 Deexxtteerriity  7 Excommmunuincicaatte  186 
Crreeaatturres  214 Diice Roolll,, Asssign  8 Exhoorrt  46 

Abbililiities  214 Diice Roolll,, In Orrdeer  8 Exorcissmm  1140,, 186 
Armeed Combbaatt Coonnssiiddeerraattions  222 Diice Step  5 Expeerrience Moodidfifiier  9 

295



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  InNdDEexX 

Expeerrience Roollls  71 Fanaatticiissmm  126 Ghhoouull  244 
Extended Famiilly Tablle  25 Find  126 Giiant  245 
Extensioon  186 Fireeaarrrrooww  126 Giifftts  201 

Fireblade  126 Sampplle Giifftts  202 

F Frossttbiite  126 Gllamour  126 
F Gllamour  126 Gllossary of Termss  5 
Falllinng  2,, 44,, 68,, 78,, 158 Gllue  126 Gllue  126 

Obbjjeecctts Heeaall  126 Goobbllin  246 
Froomm a Moovviing Veehhiicclle  78 Heeaatt  127 Goolld Piece  54 

Famililiies  21 Igniite  127 Goorrgon  247 
Famiilly & Coonnnneeccttiions  25 Incogniito  127 Grrade  5 
Fanaatticciissmm  126 Irroonnhand  127 Grrading Oppppoonneenntts  286 
Farmeer  30 Knock  127 Grraapppller  216 
Fatiggue  2,, 43,, 48,, 68,, 69,, 70,, 71,, 75,, 76,, 77,, 78,, Learning  121 Grraappplling  106 

79,, 82,, 84,, 96,, 117,, 125,, 1129,, 1155,, 156,, Light  127 Grriifffifinn  248 
1158,, 1159,, 183,, 188,, 2099,, 2111,, 212,, 215,, Limiitts to Caappaacciity  122 Grriip  97 
216,, 218,, 2288,, 2333,, 2355,, 2699,, 271 Lock  127 Grroup Roollls  51 

Phyyssiicall Effffort Maaggnniiffy  127 Grrowtth  186 
Effffects of  78 Miightt  127 Guuaarrdiian Spiirriits  149 

Reecovveerring frroomm Miimiic  127 Guuiillds  114,, 194 
Maannaaggiing  79 Miinddsspeeech  127 

Fear  186 Moobibliliity  127 
Feattheerrllight  158 Naatture of  121 H 
Fecunddiity  186 Pathhway  127 Haagggglling  2,, 45,, 51,, 55,, 56 
Fetches  149 Perfuumme  128 Haallffllinng  249 
Fetishes  135 Pet  128 Haarmoonniisse  186 
Fightinng at the Longer Reach  106 Phantassmm  128 Haarpy  250 
Fightinng at the Shorrtter Reach  106 Pierce  128 Haauunntts  150 
Find  126 Pollish  128 Heeaall  126 
Fireeaarrrrooww  126 Preserve  128 Heeaall Body  186 
Fireblaade  126 Prottectioon  128 Heeaalling  46 
Fires  2,, 68, 79 Reeppaaiir  128 Maaggiiccaall  80 
Firinng inton a CtCroowwd  108 Repugnaancce  128 Permaaneentt  80 
Firinng on the Moovve  108 Shock  128 Heeaalling frroomm Injuury  2,, 68,, 80,, 110 
Fiirst Aiid Shove  128 Heeaalling Raatte  9 

Fiirst Aiid Accttions  41 Sleep  128 Heeaall Miind  187 
Fisher  30 Slooww  128 Heeaall Woound  187 
Flurry  97 Speedaarrtt  128 Heeaarrtt Seizure  187 
Fly  170 Spiiritshieldd  129 Heeaarrtt Slooww  158 
Flyinng  216 Startinng  121 Heeaatt  127 
Flyinng Combbaatt  103 Tidy  129 Heeiight and Weeiightt  9 
Folk Maaggiic  46,, 121 Tiire  129 Heerrder  31 

Acccceesss to  121 Trraaiits  123 Heerrooiic Lasst Accttions  110 
Alarrmm  123 Transsllate  129 Hiide Liife  170 
Apppprraaiise  123 Tune  129 Hiigh Shamman  131 
Avveerrt  123 Ubbiiqquuiitous  122 Hiindeer  170 
Babbblle  123 Ussing  122 Hiipppooggrriiffff  248 
Beeaassttccaalll  124 Venttrillooqquuissmm  129 Hiit Loccaattions  109 
Befudddlle  124 Viigour  129 Hiit Loccaattiionss,, Non-Human  276 
Bladesharp  124 Vooiice  129 Hiit Poiintts  10 
Bludgeon  124 Waarrmtth  129 Hoolld Breath  216 
Breath  124 Wititcchhssiight  129 Hoollddffaasst  170 
Bypaasss  124 Folloowwer  131 Hoolld Maaggiic  91 
Caallcuullate  124 Food  59 Hoopplilitte  57 
Calmm  124 Force  107 Hoorrsse  251 
Chhilill  124 Force Faiilure  97 Huunntter  31 
Clleanse  125 Formiiddaabblle Naatturraall Weeaaponss  158,, 216 
Cooooll  125 Forrttify  186 
Coooorrddiinaattion  125 Freely Immpprroving Skiillls  72 I| 
Crreeaating New Speellls  129 Frenzy  216 Igniite  127 
Cuurrsse  125 Fumbblle  37 Illluussiioonn  187 
Daarrknneesss  125 Immmuunniitty  158, 216 
Deeffllect  125 Immppaalle  97 
Deemmoroarlailise  125 G Immppaalled  41 
Diisheevveell  125 Gaambblliing  46 Immppaalling Ranged Atttacks  108 
Diisruptioon  125 Gameess Maassttery  278 Innanimaatte Obbjjeecctts  2,, 68,, 81 
Drry  125 Gamee Systeemm  68 Ussing Weeaapoonss Aggaaiinsst  81 
Duulllblade  125 Gaanggs  194 Incogniito  127 
Duurraattion of Speellls  123 Gaazze Atttack  216 Inncoomme  54 
Exttinguiish  125 Geeaasa  204 Inncoomme betwween Addvveenntturring  55 

296



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  InNdDEexX 

Indomititaabblle  158 Deessttructioon and Conssumppttiion  116 Berserk  183 
Infflluueennce  42 Diismiissssing Onne’e’s Own  120 Bind Ghhoosstt  183 
Iniitiativve  5,, 90 Enduurring Coosstts  120 Blless Crrops  183 

Caallcullatinng Folk  112 Breathe Waatter  183 
Penaallty  90 How Maany Abbililiities?  114 Caalll Wiindss  184 

Iniitiativve Bonus  10 Interruuptinng Caasstting  119 Chameelleon  184 
Inject Venomm  218 Learning New Abbililiities  118 Cllear Skiies  184 
Insect Swarmm  251 Learning New Tradiitioons  118 Cloud Caalll  184 
Insight  42 Maaggiiccaall Loccaattions  116 Coonnsseeccrraatte  184 
Intelliiggeennce  7 Maaggnniittude and Intenssity  120 Coorrrrupttion  184 
Intelliiggeennce and Instinnct  214 Myysstticissmm  113 Coosstt of Requueesstting  181 
Intenssity  5 Reessttricteed Accttions  119 Curre Maallady  185 
Interrupt  92 Riittuaalliissttic Caasstting Timees  115 Curre Sense  185 
Intimmiidatte  216 Rooyyaallty and Noobblle Hoouussees  114 Deessccrriipttions  182 
Intuitioonn  170 Saccrriiffiice  116 Diismiisss Elemeennttaall  185 
Invesstigatioons  282 Self  116 Diismiisss Maaggiic  185 
Invocatioon  47 Socciiall Caassttes  114 Diisspeelllinng  182 
Invoking a Speelll  164 Sorcery  113 Earthquake  185 
Iqari  252 Stackinng  120 Elemeennttaall Summoonniing  185 
Irroonnhhand  127 Startinng Maaggiic  118 Enttangglle  186 

Taiiloorinng  112 Enntthhrraalll  186 
Teacheerrs  114 Excommmunuincicaatte  186 

J ThTheissmm  113 Exorcissmm  186 
Juumm piing  39 Totemm s  114 Extensioon  186 

Tradiitioons  113 Fear  186 
Ussing  119 Fecunddiity  186 

K Veneerraatioon  116 Forrttify  186 
Kaara  7,, 21,, 22,, 49,, 120,, 123,, 180,, 1181,, 1184,, 193,, Whheerre Do Maaggiic Poiintts Comee From?  115 Grrowtth  186 

197 Maaggiiccaall Diisscciiplline  5 Haarrmoonniisse  186 
Kiilll Sileently  98 Maaggiiccaall Energy  115 Heeaall Body  186 
Knock  127 Maaggiiccaall Tradiitioon  5 Heeaall Miind  187 
Knoocckback  104 Maaggiic Poiintts Heeaall Woound  187 

Reecovveerring  116 Heeaarrtt Seizure  187 

 Recovery  117 Illluussiioonn  187 
L Runnniing Ouutt Of  117 Lay to Reesst  187 
Language  47 Saccrriiffiiccinng  117 Leeching  187 
Lay to Reesst  187 Maaggiic Sense  158,, 216 Limiittations  182 
Leader  199 Maaggnniittude  5 Maaddnneessss  187 
Leaper  216 Maajjor Woound  41,, 110 Maaggnniittude and Intenssity  182 
Leaping Atttacks  104 Maammmootth  255 Miinnddbbllaasstt  188 
Leeching  187 Maanntiticorre  256 Miinnddllink  188 
Liife Sense  1158,, 216 Manatnitsis,, Giiant  257 Miirrage  188 
Liiffttiinng  39 Maarrk  170 Obblilitterate  188 
Light  127 Maarrksman  98 Pacciify  188 
Lingguuiissttiic Fluuency  47 Maarrriiage  23 Perseverance  188 
Linothorax  57 Maaxxiimiisse Damaagge  98 Prroppiittiiate  188 
Lion  253 Meecchhaanniismss  48 Rain of (SSubstance))  188 
Liteeraacy  47 Meeddiicciine Spiirriits  1151 Raaiise Undead  188 
Livestoock  59 Meeddititaattioon  48,, 154 Reeffllectioon  189 
Lizard,, Giiantt  254 Meeerros  11, 7,, 114,, 117,, 22,, 29,, 36,, 50,, 54,, 56,, 80,, 92,, Reejjuvenaatte  189 
Lizzaarrddmman  254 1111,, 115,, 123,, 158,, 159,, 164,, 1168,, 179,, Reessurrrrect  189 
Loading Ranged Weeaapoonss  109 1193,, 197,, 199,, 2044,, 2055,, 2100,, 259,, 283,, Ripen  189 
Loccaalle  42 284,, 287 Sacred Band  189 
Lock  127 Meellee Weeaapoonss  61 Sever Spiirriit  189 
Lockppiicking  47 Meerrcchaantt  31 Shiield  189 
Lore  47 Miimiic  127 Soull Sight  190 
Luck Poiintts  2,, 8,, 110,, 111,, 22,, 68,, 81,, 111,, 1143,, Miinnddbbllaasst  188 Spiirriit Block  190 

1159,, 204,, 2700,, 2799,, 2800,, 2822,, 287,, 288,, Miinnddllink  188 Steadffast  190 
304 Miineer  31 Sunspear  190 

Ussing Miinor Woound  41,, 110 Sureshot  190 
Grroup  81 Miinnoottaur  258 ThThunnddeerrccllap  191 

Lycanthropy  273 Miirraacclle True (WWeeapon))  191 
Exhhoorrttatioon Timme  181 Miriraacclles by Cuullt Rank  190 

 Miriraacclles Miriraacclleess,, Reequueesstting  181 
M Abbssoorrpttion  182 Miirrage  188 
Maaddnneesss  187 Aeeggiis  182 Mjju  7, 1200,, 155,, 156,, 158,, 159 
Maaggiic Awaaken  182 Moonansatseterriies  206 

and Chhaarraacctteerrs  118 Backllash  183 Moonneeyy,, Startinng  21 
Animismm  112 Beeaasst Formm  183 Moouunntt  91 
Caasstting Requiiremeenntts  119 Beholld  183 Moouunntted Combbaatt  104 

297



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  InNdDEexX 

Moovve  91 Perceive (Sensse))  171 Sailor  32 
Moovvemeenntt Raatte  10 Perceptioon  42 Scar Foe  99 
Muulltti-HHeaded  216 Perseverance  188 Schoollar  32 
Muulltti-LLiimmbed  216 Petersen Rulles of Good Gamiing  278 Scorpiion,, Giiant  263 
Muultltiiplle Oppppoonneennttss  104 Phantoomm (Sensse))  171 Scoutt  32 
Mummy  260 Phyyssiician  32 Seamaannsshiip  48 
Muusisicciianshiip  48 Pin Down  98 Sea Serpentt  264 
Myyssttiic  31 Pin Weeaapon  98 Seduccttioon  49 
Myyststiiccaall Orrddeerrs  193 Piittfalll  83 Select Target  99 
Myysstticissmm  154 Poiintts Buiild  8 Sense (Obbjjeecctt,, State or Subsstanccee))  174 

Auggmeennttiing Skiillls  156 Poiintts Buuiilld,, Non-HHuman  219 Serious Woound  41,, 110 
Enhaancciing Atttributes  159 Poison  74 Serious Woouunnddss,, Treatinng  46 
Immppllemeenntting a Talent  156 Poison Immmuunniitty  217 Sever Spiirriit  189 
Invoking Trraaiits  156 Poiisonss,, Sampplle  76 Shamman  32,, 131 
Maaggnniittude and Intenssity  156 Posssessioon  140 Surviving afftter Deeaath  141 
Paths and Tallentts  155 Posssseessssion,, Coovveerrt  217 Shapechange  174 
Spiirriit Sense  158 Posssseessssion,, Doommiinnaanntt  217 Shappee--SShhiiffttinng Spiirriits  152 
Startinng Myyststiics  155 Poweer  7 Shaping  49 
Talent Deessccrriipttions  156 Predator Spiirriits  151 Shark  264 
Ussing  156 Preparatioon and Gamee Aiids  279 Shiield  189 

Myyssttiic (Sense)  171 Prepare Coouunntter  98 Shiields  63 
Press Addvvaannttage  98 Shock  128 
Prriiest  32 Shove  128 

N Primiittive  16 Shrrines  206 
Naattiive Tongue  42 Proffessionall Skiillls  113,, 44 Shrinnk  174 
Naatturre Spiirriits  151 Prroppiittiiate  188 Siblinngs Tablle  25 
Naavviigatioon  48 Propoorrttionaall Skiilll Successs  52 Sickness Spiirriits  152 
Neeuutrtraalliise Maaggiic  171 Prottecttive Waarrd  173 Siege Weeaaponss  62 
Niight Sight  1158,, 217 Proven  198 Signall  93 
Nomaaddiic  15 Pullled Blows  105 Silvver Piece  54 
Non-HHuman Speecciies  6 Sing  43 

Size  7 
R 

 Skiilll  5 
O Raabbblle  111 Skiillls  37 
Oaatths  203 Rain of (Substance))  188 Caappiing  50 
Obblilitterate  188 Raaiise Undeead  188 Increasinng  72 
Occttoppuuss,, Giiant  261 Range  107 Learning New  73 
Offfificiiall  31 Ranged Coommbabtat,, Situuatioonall Moodidfiifieerrs  107 Reeatteemmpptting 
Oggrre  261 Ranged Weeaapoonss  61 Diifffferent Situuatioons  50 
Oppeenniing Range  107 Range Pennaaltltiieess,, Reeaalliissttic  109 Skkiillls,, Mooddififying  38 
Open Range  98 Rapiid Reload  99 Skiillls Summmarairiees  53 
Opphhiidiian  254 Ready Weeaapon  92 Slargr  265 
Oppppoossed Roolll  5 Reeffllectioonn  189 Sleep  128 
Oppppoossed Roollls  50 Regain Footting  92 Sleigght  49 
Oppppoossed Skiillls Ovveer 1000%%  51 Reeggeenneerraatte  173 Slipp Free  99 
Orraatory  48 Reegeeneerraatioon  217 Slooww  128 
Orrc  246 Regimeenntts  194 Smiilodon  266 
Orrggaanniissatioon  4 Reejjuvenaatte  189 Smoottheer  174 
Ouuttmaannooeeuuvvrre  92 Ranged Combbaatt Snaakkee,, Giiantt  266 
Ouuttmaannooeeuuvvrriing  104 Force Socciiall Cllass  21,, 23,, 24,, 30,, 54,, 59,, 281 
Ovveerrextend Oppppoonneenntt  98 Damaagge Moodidfifiier Socciiall Coonnflfliict  287 
Ovveerrppeenneettrraattion  98 Range  107 Sorcerer  33 
Ovveerrsseer  198 Reload  107 Sorcery  161 

Remiisse  99 Abbjjure  166 
P Reeppaaiir  128 Anniimaatte  166 
P Repugnance  128 Atttract  167 
Pacciify  188 Reepuullse (Crreaatturreess))  173 Baniish  167 
Pain Coonnttrroll  158 Reepuuttaattioon Tablle  25 Bypaasss Armoouur  167 
Pallsy  171 Reesourrces  65 Caasstback  167 
Panthottaur  262 Reessurrrrect  189 Combbiine  162 
Parentts Tablle  25 Reevviiviify  173 Damaagge Enhancemeenntt  167 
Parry  92 Riide  43 Damaagge Reessiistaance  167 

Unnaabblle to Ripen  189 Diimiinniish  167 
Faileed to  95 Riivaalls  2,, 22, 25 Diisspeelllinng a Sorcery Speelll  165 

Parrying a Miisssed Atttack  94 Runnniing  39 Doommininaatte  167 
Passions  22 Draw  168 

Increasinng  72 
s   Duurraattion  162 

Using  282 S Enchantt  168 
Passsive Blocking  105 Sacred Band  189 Enhance (Chhaararactcetreirsisttiic))  169 
Pathhway  127 Sacrosanct Loccaattions  180 Enllarge  169 

298



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  InNdDEexX 

Enssllave (Crreaatturreess))  169 Phyyssiicall Damaagge  139 Summoonniing a  136 
Evoke  169 Speecciiall Effffects  138 Tellekiineessiis  145 
Fly  170 Tenaacciity  139 Traps  141 
Furrther Extending Duurraattion  163 Spiirriit Cuulltts  193 Types  142 
Hiide Liife  170 Spiirriit Damaagge  131 Unnddeeaath  153 
Hiindeer  170 Spiirriit Reessiistance  174 Waarrddiing  145 
Hoollddffaasst  170 Spiirriits Wiitther  145 
Immpprriison  170 Abbililiities  142 Wrraaiitths  153 
Intuitiioonn  170 Anncceessttor  147 Spiiritshieldd  129 
Invocatioon  161 Anniimaatte  142 Spiirriit Socciieettiiess,, Cuulltts & Tradiitioons  131 
Invocatioon Coosstts  165 Appppllying Spiirriit Poweerrs  142 Spiirriit Woorrsshhiippeer  131 
Invocatioon Timme  165 Atttittuude  134,, 137 Squeeze  159 
Invoking a Speelll  164 Attttributtes  133 Stanndard Skiillls  11 
Learning Speellls  164 Autonnommy  143 Stannd Fast  99 
Limiittations  165 Bane  147 Steadffast  190 
Maaggnniittude  162 Binding  135 Stealthh  43 
Maaggnniittude and Intenssity  165 Binding a Soull innto a Livinng Crreature  141 Store Maanna  175 
Maarrk  170 Binding Huugge Spiirriits  142 Streetwwiise  49 
Myyssttiic (Sense)  171 Blless  143 Streenngth  7 
Neeuutrtraalliise Maaggiic  171 Body Snatching  141 Strikkinng  106 
Palsy  171 Caanninbiablailsisttiic  143 Strugglle  92 
Perceive (Sensse))  171 Chhaararcatceterirsisttiics  133 Stuun Loccaatioon  99 
Phantoomm (Sensse))  171 Commpprreehheennssiion  143 Succcceessss,, Auuttomaattiic  37 
Porrttall  172 Coonnjjuggaatte  143 Suffffocatioonn  2,, 68, 71 
Projject (Sense)  172 Coovveerrtt  143 Summmon  175 
Prrottecttive Waarrd  173 Cuurrsse  143,, 147 Sunder  99 
Range  162 Deeaaddlly  143 Sunspear  190 
Reeggeenneerraatte  173 Deeaath  148 Suppeerrssttiitioons  203 
Reepuullse (Crreaatturreess))  173 Deeffiining  132 Sureshot  190 
Reessttrictinng Comppoonneennttss  165 Deemeessne  143 Surgery  47 
Reevviiviify  173 Deessiigning  142 Surrprriise  105 
Schooolls and Speellls  163 Diiaabboolliic  140 Surrvviivall  3,, 14,, 116,, 29,, 30,, 31,, 32,, 33,, 42,, 49,, 53,, 
Scullpt (Substance))  173 Diifffferent Settinngs  141 59,, 68,, 82,, 84,, 155,, 2099,, 211,, 212,, 2199,, 
Sense  174 Diiscorpoorraatte  143 225, 227,, 223300,, 2322,, 2355,, 2400,, 241,, 252,, 
Shapechange  174 Diisease  143 253,, 259,, 2622,, 263 
Shaping  161 Doommininaattion  144 Sweep Atttacks  105 
Shrinnk  174 Elemeennttaall  148 Swimm  43 
Smoottheer  174 Endowmeenntt  144 Swimmmeer  217 
Speelll Reessiistaance  174 Eternall  144 Swiitch Body  175 
Spiirriit Reessiistance  174 Examppllees  145 
Startinng Sorrcerrers  163 Fetches  149 T 
Store Maanna  175 Fetishes  135 T
Summmon  175 Gllamour  144 Taboos  204 
Summoonniing Ottherwoorrlld Ennttiitties  169 Guuaarrdiian  149 Take Weeaapon  101 
Swiitch Body  175 Haauunntts  150 Tap (Chhaarraactceterirsisttiic)  175 
Tap (Chhaarraactceterirsisttiic)  175 Heeaalling  144 Task Roundss  66 
Targeetts  162 Intenssity  133 Task Ruulles inn Otther Ciircumssttancces  67 
Telepathy  175 Limiitts to Bound  136 Teach  49 
Teleporrt  175 Loccaatting  134 Teacheerrs  73, 114 
Transsffer Woound  176 Maana  144 Teachiingg,, Geenneerraall vs Speecciiffiic  49 
Transmooggrriify  176 Maaninfifeessttatioon  144 Teamm Roolll  52 
Trap Soull  176 Meeddiicciine  151 Temppllees  206 
Unnddeeaath  177 Miiasmma  144 Tenaacciity  139 
Ussing  164 Naatture  151 Terrifyinng  217 
Wrraack  177 Neeggoottiiatioon  134 ThTheissmm  178 

Sorcery Orrddeerrs  193 Obbsseerrving  137 Cuulltts and Miriraacclles  179 
Sortinng Roolll  52 Passioon  144 Deevvoottion  178 
Speak  93 Percepttive  145 Deevvoottiionaall Pooolls  180 
Spear Trap  84 Perrssistent  145 Doonnaatting Maaggiic Poiintts  180 
Speecciiall Effffect  5 Posssessioon and Exorcissmm  140 Exhoorrt  178 
Speecciiall Effffects  95 Predator  151 Joinninng Moorre ThThan One Cuullt  180 
Speecciiall Effffects Summaarry  100 Puppppeetteer  145 Learning Miriraacclles  179 
Speedaarrt  128 Reecurrring Trraaiit  138 Sacrosanct Loccaattions  180 
Speelll Reessistaance  174 Reejjuvenaatting  140 Startinng ThTheeiisstts  179 
Spiideerr,, Giiant  267 Sagacciity  145 Ussing ThTheissmm  180 
Spiirriit Block  190 Shapechange  145 ThTheeiist Cuulltts  193 
Spiirriit Combbaatt  137 Shaappee--SShhiiffttinng  152 ThThiief  33 

Coonnsseequueennccees of Deeffeat  138 Sickness  152 ThThrowiing  39 
Engaging  137 Speelllcastinng  145 ThThunnddeerrccllap  191 
Oppttiions  139 Subjjugaatte  145 Tidy  129 

299



MYyTtHhRrAaSs::  InNdDEexX 

Tiiger  268 Wrraack  177 
Tiire  129 Wrraaiiths  153 
Tooolls  60 Wyyrrm//Wyyvveern  273 
Track  49 
Traininng  49,, 73,, 74,, 1199,, 2077,, 2911,, 292 
Trampplle  218 X 
Trance  50 Xenos  7, 211,, 74,, 80,, 1180,, 205,, 2844,, 2866,, 287 
Trance Prepaarratioon Timme  131 
Transsffer Woound  176 
Transsllate  129 Z 
Transmooggrriify  176 Zamootthhiis  7,, 29,, 74,, 90,, 92,, 95,, 101,, 109,, 111 
Traps  3,, 60,, 68,, 82,, 83,, 1141,, 288 Zombbiie  274 

Ussing  288 
Trap Soull  176 
Trapss,, Sampplle  83 
Trip Oppppoonneenntt  101 
Trrolll  269 
True (WWeeapon))  191 
Tune  129 
Turn  5 
Turns  90 

U 
Unarmed  43 
Unarmed Combbaatt  105 
Unnccoonnsscciiouussnneesss  41 
Undeead  218 
Unnddeeaath  177 
Unnddeeaath Spiirriits  153 
Unnddeerrlliings  111 
Unniicorn  270 
Usse Luck Poiint  93 

V\4 
Vamppiirre  270 
Vamppiririic  218 
Veehhiicclles  62 
Venomoouuss  218 
Venttrillooqquuissmm  129 
Viigour  129 
Viissiibiillityy  3,, 68,, 84 
Vuullneerrablle  218 

W 
Waarrd Loccaatioon  93 
Waarrriior  33 
Weeaapon Maallffunccttion  101 
Weeaapon Reach Caattegoorriies  94 
Weeaapon Reach –- Cllosing and Oppeenniing Range  

106 
Weeaapon Size and Reach  93 
Weeaapon Size Caattegoorriies  94 
Weeaappoonnss,, One Haanded  63 
Weeaappoonnss,, Ranged  65 
Weeaappoonnss,, Two Handed  64 
Weeaattheer  3,, 68,, 84,, 184 

Prrecciipiitatioonn 
Temppeerraatturre 

Wiind  84 
Wiilllppower  44 
Wiinged Ape  272 
Wititcchhssiight  129 
Wiithdraww  101 
Wiitthdrawiing  107 
Woollf  272 
Woouunnddiing Oppppoonneenntts wiith an Enduurrance over 

1000%%  110 

300



Mythras:  Appendix: Play Aids

BoH X = oM ¥ Gow o Ewm KT KKK EAR LT T XM 

Appendix:L )  
Play Aids

BoH X = oM ¥ Gow o Ewm KT KKK EAR LT T XM 

ythras has plenty of play aids and resources, many of 

M MYyTtHhRrAaSs EnNEemMYy GEeNnEeRrAaTtoORr 
 which are free to use or download, and we have listed This online tool rapidly creates statistics for hundreds of Mythras 
our favourites in this section. Over the next three pages creatures and NPCs. Individual enemies or entire gangs of them 

we also provide a character sheet and a combat tracking sheet; both can be created at the press of a button and then exported to PDF 
are valuable resources for both players and Games Masters. Feel free if one wishes. 
to make copious copies of these for personal use. 

Other resources that you may find useful are as follows: LinNnkks TtoO PLlAaYy AIiDdsSs 

MyyYtThHRrAaSs GAaMmEeSs MAaSTstEeRr'’Ss GUuIiDdEe Design Mechanism Website 
This free PDF collects together all the essential tables and charts www.thedesignmechanism.com/products 

from the game into a handy PDF that can be printed and chopped 
up to create a custom GM screen. The guide also includes two DrivethruRPG 
starting scenarios, one of which following Anathaym’s fate after the www.drivethrurpg.com/browse/pub/4057/Design-Mechanism 
earthquake that shakes Meeros. 

Enemy Generator 
MYyTtHhRrAaSs ImMPpEeRrAaTtIivVEe 

http://ouropa.planeetta.com/rq_tools/enemygen/ 
This free booklet is a beginners’ introduction to Mythras. Con- 

densing the rules into less than 50 pages, this is the ideal way for 
Lulu Webstore 

players and GMs new to Mythras - and d100 gaming in general - to 
http://www.lulu.com/spotlight/Mythras 

get to grips with the system. Imperative is free to download from 
the Design Mechanism website, DrivethruRPG, and other online 
game sites. You can also buy a printed copy from Lulu - see the list 
of links, opposite. 

MyyYtThHRrAaSs COoMmBbAaTt AppPp 
Designed for Android, this app presents all the Special Effects in 

an electronic format, showing at a glance what effects are available, 
what they do, and additional information relating to combat results. 
It can be downloaded from Google Play. 

MyyTtHhRrAaSs COoMmBbAaTt CAaRrDdSs 
All the Special Effects presented in a deck of 60 playing cards. 

Fach card deals with a single effect, one side illustrating the effect 
with an evocative woodcut, and the other side noting the specifics 
of the effect. Presented as cards, this deck is ideal for those new to 
Mythras as a handful of effects can be agreed on and held in-hand, 
thereby focusing choices and making it easier to envisage the effect 
and when best to use it. It also makes Special Effects even more fun 
than simply consulting a list. Available from DrivethruRPG. 

301



i Mythras:  Appendix: Play Aids ™ 
PLAYER: CHARACTER: 

A0 1 S0 0 N N B 

SPECIES: GENDER: AGE: 

FrAME: CULTURE: 

HEeiGHT: SociaL Crass: yihr 
LLEEL PR SR e 

WeiGHT: CAREER: 
. J 

—— NoTes ABOUT BACKGROUND, COMMUNITY & FAMILY ————— — CoNTACTS, ALLIES & ENEMIES — 

_ VAR J 

——— CHARACTERISTICS ATTRIBUTES N MONEY & WEALTH — 
Original  Max.  Current Original - Current 

ACTION POINTS 

DAMAGE MODIFIER 

EXPERIENCE MODIFIER 

Income Day Week Season Year 
HEALING RATE ——_ ' 

J 
INniTiaTIVE BONUS ——+— MaAGIC POINTS —M8M— 

o 1 2 g 4 5 6 7 8 g 10 
Luck PoiNTs 

o1z 19 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 

CHARISMA MOVEMENT RATE Ese:;l;édge e:;ecti;): 27 28 29 g0 
A _J 

— STANDARD SKILLS N\ PROTESSIONAL SKILLS N EXPERIENCE ROLLS ————— 
Skill basic % |4 % Skill basic % 4 % 
Athletics & STR+DEX (][] o0 _— 
Bt]:&ling‘ STR + CON E‘ D A— l:‘ l:l P— k J 

Brawn M STR+s1z [ [ o — MAGIC SKiLLS 
Conceal i DEX+POW [ [  Skill basic % 4 Yo 

Customs INT x2 RN RN Folk Magic oW +cHA [] O 

Dance & DEX+CHA [] [ Od Binding POW+CHA [] [ 
Deceit INT+CHA [] [] RN Trance con+row [ [] 

Drive & DEX+POW [] [ [ I Meditation coN+INT OO0 
Endurance coNxe [ [ 0 Mysticism con+pow [ [ 

Evade @ DEXx [ [ Oogd Invocation Ne [0 

First AidB INT + DEX D |:] |:| D Shaping INT + POW D D 

Influence cHAx: (1T Oogd Devotion POW+CHA [] [ 

Insight INT+POW [ ] [] 0 Exhort INT+cHA ] O 

Locale INT x2 RN 0o = 

Perception INT+POW [] [ HEN r— PASSIONS — 

Ride & DEX+POW [J [0 LANGUAGES (INT + CHA) Passion % 
Sing CHA+POW [ Skill (%] % 

Stealth & DEX+INT (O[O Native T. aad 
Swim # sTR+coN [J[] RN 
Unarmed STR + DEX [:| |:] - |:| D 

Willpower POW x2 [:I D L l:‘ D ) L ) 

Ed: Fumbled skill | E: Trained skill | &: Affected by Encumbrance (ENC) | 0: Armour Penalty Design and layout: Pelayo MDC



My thras:  A) ppendoix:: PLlay Aiipds 
P EQUIPMENT & ARMOUR e MOVEMENT ————— 

Movement types Move U 
Walk : 

Sprint* (Move + Ath. %/25% m) x5 -Um 

Equipment ENC 

Armour ENC (Equipped = ENC/2) R ~ Rough or rugged surface — -Dim 
TOTAL ENC £ Steep surface Un 

o 
Armour Penalty ()) = armour ENC/5 e o Sheer surface — -Den 

. S| Swimi Do Sum St 
Hit LocATiONS 4: Athletics critical success: +1 m to base/jump Movement. 

#:hy: PC's height (meters). Minimal run-up = 5 m. 
dzo Location AP Hit Points Without run-up: halved distance and - /4 m. 

Y Swimming critical success = +1 m. 
1 2 7 8 g 10 

1G- 20 > (: PC floats and can move. 
o 

-1 =2 - -8 -9 -10 1: Swimming Move /2-10) = {: Yo T bt s 
». s rounded down. = ; . 

——— CuLT INFORMATION 
) r 2 3 4 5 Ranks ¢ Benefits € Restrictions ¢4 Gifts €< Geas 

1315 Right A L) 
U T -2 -3 -4 5 -6 

1 2 

478 Abdomen U 0 
S -2 

Max, Current 

OO 
1 8 e B W k F 

L p ABILITIES 
———— RESISTANCES Spells € Spirits ¢ Talents ¢ Miracles 

Skill basic % 4 %o . 

Brawn i STR+81Z [ [ = 'é 
Endurance oNe 0O 'g E; '2'5; % _r-z " 

Willpower oW [ [ O O O O O ) 

-~ COMBAT STYLES 
Style name Weapons Trait 7] Yo 

[ — 
[ [— 
[ [— 

- —_—— < 
e WEAPONS & SHIELDS % 
Melee weapons & shields Damage Size Reach Traits Combat Effects AP HP (Max./current) 

X 

/ 

/ 

K 

wA 

K 

. 

Ranged weapons Damage DM Force Load Range Combat Effects Size AP HP (Max./current) 

/ 

X 

S£ d: Fumbled skill | €: Trained skill | &: Affected by Encumbrance (ENC) | U: Armour Penalty 303 Design and layout: Melayo MDCg 



MyyTtHhRrAaSs::  APpPpEeNnDdIiXx:: PLlAaYy AIiDdSs 

304 

- Round 1 Round 2 Round 3 Round 4 

Strike Creature / NPC Engaged With... Action Points Wounds & Status Action Points Spent Action Points Spent J\cllon Pm““ Spcn( )\ctmn Pmnl'; Spent 
Rank 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 2 3 45 6 1 4 5 6 

g . 
(Notes for This Combat Instructions for Use 

Record the name or description of NPCs / Creatures against the 
Strike Rank Value. Note how many Action Points the opponent has 
available. Use the relevant columns to note who the NPC / Creatire 
is engaged with, and what its status is in terms of wounds sustained 
;Ill(] any ot|1(:r |mp0(tm1t notes, 

For each round shade in or strke through each Action Point box as 
Action Points are used, denied or cxp{-ndrd. Carry-over Action Point 

\ Usage into the next ronnd where necessary. p, 



Aythrb athse  aeclzimed fantacy mleplaying game. 
Frepything you foed for extiling adyamliin 

o Fxntaatse walldn 

fs presiui n one volume. 

X chufisiing woarnbonT A wily Bhbel A gtil sfoorerd® A dgend ol th Gada? 

Iy Adtheraors  define vaurf eharactes B Akl b
l vt pent alow 

foor insfimlde comilnatofi toabnonsts and cipabalities 

LT ] Wil IKYRIL 

Ay yoius & momath of the seppes foliruing t
he teepd s ? Brahaps youl ares 

Rarrd oo Teaabeatiai used b b radds ol s anriahilsoary wond o winims of 

ifhe Cacmbi. Alaglee you Ape A ity dwetlere, o e waB i
U  anad A eiGrs 

of enaliratian, T Alyihees whne you Game front ivas Empartant i whea yuil e 

SR R . ! Bnd 

[ v wospshilgd the mighty Geoif JeUrSt80srm amd W A Y, |;-.-|l'|.
1|:|-. 

2 EsBower of the Gneat Arovsion SpiriksO? i it that you i the Gaods and 
e

fllives & e skl parhy seeking vnlig
hpelmoil aned e i e ayites 

1
yini Ju;!q i 1he dark amil dire potency il wea

poryt0 Al elo ol et 

e YOUr mags anid your destimy il thro
uigh theem Bootss §0 Uhe - 

. 
RGe o the b‘;..,u,!- Lhaiie] W

i  

L' L w i i Tis 
Py TR vl i 

MualiEes suipgorls ey & elo fapn
anys fecmy yoniis 

s andd Sapery thamegh de el Fa
ntasy 

allienare T With miaghc wivh i bt ol vl
 

and myechanios 340 T ible and adsprabide, 

Wik Ay ireres o (M0 T COEE Cher waritina 

agid $b0ders ol ik, Yo AN 1|t.|]' 

o ele churad ler dreal R 

P S ates el syl £ 
Five dhiterond fommis] MR 
A e seleot e o Croalunes 20 pidnis 

fropn mayth and legend 
Comnthapaie sduiin fat Gt Mot 

THE ESIGN’ 
“NMECHANISM 
e